 Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
  Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore--
  While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
  As of some one gently rapping--rapping at my chamber door.
  "'Tis some visitor," I muttered, "tapping at my chamber door--
          Only this and nothing more."

  Ah, distinctly I remember, it was in the bleak December,
  And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
  Eagerly I wished the morrow;--vainly I had sought to borrow
  From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore--
  For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
          Nameless here for evermore.

  And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
  Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
  So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating
  "'Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door--
  Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door;--
      This it is and nothing more."

  Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
  "Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
  But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
  And so faintly you came tapping--tapping at my chamber door,
  That I scarce was sure I heard you"--here I opened wide the door:--
        Darkness there and nothing more.

  Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering,
    fearing,
  Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;
  But the silence was unbroken, and the darkness gave no token,
  And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, "Lenore!"
  This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, "Lenore!"
        Merely this and nothing more.

  Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
  Soon I heard again a tapping, somewhat louder than before.
  "Surely," said I, "surely that is something at my window lattice;
  Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
  Let my heart be still a moment, and this mystery explore;--
      'Tis the wind and nothing more."

  Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
  In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore;
  Not the least obeisance made he: not an instant stopped or stayed he;
  But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door--
  Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
      Perched, and sat, and nothing more.

  Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
  By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
  "Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou," I said, "art sure no
    craven,
  Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore--
  Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!"
        Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
  Though its answer little meaning--little relevancy bore;
  For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
  Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door--
  Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
        With such name as "Nevermore."

  But the Raven, sitting lonely on that placid bust, spoke only
  That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
  Nothing further then he uttered--not a feather then he fluttered--
  Till I scarcely more than muttered, "Other friends have flown before--
  On the morrow he will leave me, as my hopes have flown before."
        Then the bird said, "Nevermore."

  Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
  "Doubtless," said I, "what it utters is its only stock and store,
  Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
  Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore--
  Till the dirges of his Hope the melancholy burden bore
      Of 'Never--nevermore.'"

  But the Raven still beguiling all my sad soul into smiling,
  Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and
    door;
  Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
  Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore--
  What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore
      Meant in croaking "Nevermore."

  This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
  To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom's core;
  This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
  On the cushion's velvet lining that the lamp-light gloated o'er,
  But whose velvet violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o'er,
        She shall press, ah, nevermore!

  Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
  Swung by Seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
  "Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath
    sent thee
  Respite--respite aad nepenthé from thy memories of Lenore!
  Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthé, and forget this lost Lenore!"
        Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!--
  Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
  Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted--
  On this home by Horror haunted--tell me truly, I implore--
  Is there--is there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!"
      Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!
  By that Heaven that bends above us--by that God we both adore--
  Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
  It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
  Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore."
        Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!" I shrieked,
    upstarting--
  "Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!
  Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
  Leave my loneliness unbroken!--quit the bust above my door!
  Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!"
      Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
  On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
  And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon's that is dreaming,
  And the lamp-light o'er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;
  And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
      Shall be lifted--nevermore!

    Hear the sledges with the bells--
  Silver bells!
  What a world of merriment their melody foretells!
  How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle,
  In their icy air of night!
  While the stars, that oversprinkle
  All the heavens, seem to twinkle
  With a crystalline delight;
  Keeping time, time, time,
  In a sort of Runic rhyme,
  To the tintinnabulation that so musically wells
  From the bells, bells, bells, bells,
  Bells, bells, bells--
  From the jingling and the tinkling of the bells.

  Hear the mellow wedding bells,
  Golden bells!
  What a world of happiness their harmony foretells!
  Through the balmy air of night
  How they ring out their delight!
  From the molten golden-notes,
  And all in tune,
  What a liquid ditty floats
  To the turtle-dove that listens, while she gloats
  On the moon!
  Oh, from out the sounding cells,
  What a gush of euphony voluminously wells!
  How it swells!
  How it dwells
  On the future! how it tells
  Of the rapture that impels
  To the swinging and the ringing
  Of the bells, bells, bells,
  Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
  Bells, bells, bells--
  To the rhyming and the chiming of the bells!
  Hear the loud alarum bells--
  Brazen bells!
  What a tale of terror now their turbulency tells!
  In the startled ear of night
  How they scream out their affright!
  Too much horrified to speak,
  They can only shriek, shriek,
  Out of tune,
  In a clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire,
  In a mad expostulation with the deaf and frantic fire
  Leaping higher, higher, higher,
  With a desperate desire,
  And a resolute endeavor
  Now--now to sit or never,
  By the side of the pale-faced moon.
  Oh, the bells, bells, bells!
  What a tale their terror tells
  Of Despair!
  How they clang, and clash, and roar!
  What a horror they outpour
  On the bosom of the palpitating air!
  Yet the ear it fully knows,
  By the twanging,
  And the clanging,
  How the danger ebbs and flows;
  Yet the ear distinctly tells,
  In the jangling,
  And the wrangling,
  How the danger sinks and swells,
  By the sinking or the swelling in the anger of the bells--
  Of the bells--
  Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
  Bells, bells, bells--
  In the clamor and the clangor of the bells!
   Hear the tolling of the bells--
  Iron bells!
  What a world of solemn thought their monody compels!
  In the silence of the night,
  How we shiver with affright
  At the melancholy menace of their tone!
  For every sound that floats
  From the rust within their throats
     Is a groan.
  And the people--ah, the people--
  They that dwell up in the steeple.
      All alone,
  And who tolling, tolling, tolling,
    In that muffled monotone,
  Feel a glory in so rolling
    On the human heart a stone--
  They are neither man nor woman--
  They are neither brute nor human--
      They are Ghouls:
  And their king it is who tolls;
  And he rolls, rolls, rolls,
           Rolls
  A pæan from the bells!
  And his merry bosom swells
  With the pæan of the bells!
  And he dances, and he yells;
  Keeping time, time, time,
  In a sort of Runic rhyme,
  To the pæan of the bells--
      Of the bells:
  Keeping time, time, time,
  In a sort of Runic rhyme,
    To the throbbing of the bells--
  Of the bells, bells, bells--
    To the sobbing of the bells;
  Keeping time, time, time,
    As he knells, knells, knells,
  In a happy Runic rhyme,
  To the rolling of the bells--
  Of the bells, bells, bells--
  To the tolling of the bells,
  Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
    Bells, bells, bells--
  To the moaning and the groaning of the bells.
  The skies they were ashen and sober;
    The leaves they were crisped and sere--
    The leaves they were withering and sere;
  It was night in the lonesome October
    Of my most immemorial year;
  It was hard by the dim lake of Auber,
    In the misty mid region of Weir--
  It was down by the dank tarn of Auber,
    In the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

  Here once, through an alley Titanic.
    Of cypress, I roamed with my Soul--
    Of cypress, with Psyche, my Soul.
  These were days when my heart was volcanic
    As the scoriac rivers that roll--
    As the lavas that restlessly roll
  Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek
    In the ultimate climes of the pole--
  That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek
    In the realms of the boreal pole.

  Our talk had been serious and sober,
    But our thoughts they were palsied and sere--
    Our memories were treacherous and sere--
  For we knew not the month was October,
  And we marked not the night of the year--
    (Ah, night of all nights in the year!)
  We noted not the dim lake of Auber--
    (Though once we had journeyed down here)--
  Remembered not the dank tarn of Auber,
    Nor the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

  And now as the night was senescent
    And star-dials pointed to morn--
    As the sun-dials hinted of morn--
  At the end of our path a liquescent
    And nebulous lustre was born,
  Out of which a miraculous crescent
    Arose with a duplicate horn--
  Astarte's bediamonded crescent
    Distinct with its duplicate horn.

  And I said--"She is warmer than Dian:
    She rolls through an ether of sighs--
    She revels in a region of sighs:
  She has seen that the tears are not dry on
    These cheeks, where the worm never dies,
  And has come past the stars of the Lion
    To point us the path to the skies--
    To the Lethean peace of the skies--
  Come up, in despite of the Lion,
    To shine on us with her bright eyes--
  Come up through the lair of the Lion,
    With love in her luminous eyes."

  But Psyche, uplifting her finger,
    Said--"Sadly this star I mistrust--
    Her pallor I strangely mistrust:--
  Oh, hasten!--oh, let us not linger!
    Oh, fly!--let us fly!--for we must."
  In terror she spoke, letting sink her
    Wings till they trailed in the dust--
  In agony sobbed, letting sink her
    Plumes till they trailed in the dust--
    Till they sorrowfully trailed in the dust.

  I replied--"This is nothing but dreaming:
    Let us on by this tremulous light!
    Let us bathe in this crystalline light!
  Its Sibyllic splendor is beaming
    With Hope and in Beauty to-night:--
    See!--it flickers up the sky through the night!
  Ah, we safely may trust to its gleaming,
    And be sure it will lead us aright--
  We safely may trust to a gleaming
    That cannot but guide us aright,
    Since it flickers up to Heaven through the night."

  Thus I pacified Psyche and kissed her,
    And tempted her out of her gloom--
    And conquered her scruples and gloom;
  And we passed to the end of a vista,
    But were stopped by the door of a tomb--
    By the door of a legended tomb;
  And I said--"What is written, sweet sister,
    On the door of this legended tomb?"
    She replied--"Ulalume--Ulalume--
    'Tis the vault of thy lost Ulalume!"

  Then my heart it grew ashen and sober
    As the leaves that were crisped and sere--
    As the leaves that were withering and sere;
  And I cried--"It was surely October
    On this very night of last year
    That I journeyed--I journeyed down here--
    That I brought a dread burden down here!
    On this night of all nights in the year,
    Ah, what demon has tempted me here?
  Well I know, now, this dim lake of Auber--
    This misty mid region of Weir--
  Well I know, now, this dank tarn of Auber,--
    This ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir."
     I saw thee once--once only--years ago:
  I must not say how many--but not many.
  It was a July midnight; and from out
  A full-orbed moon, that, like thine own soul, soaring,
  Sought a precipitate pathway up through heaven,
  There fell a silvery-silken veil of light,
  With quietude, and sultriness and slumber,
  Upon the upturn'd faces of a thousand
  Roses that grew in an enchanted garden,
  Where no wind dared to stir, unless on tiptoe--
  Fell on the upturn'd faces of these roses
  That gave out, in return for the love-light,
  Their odorous souls in an ecstatic death--
  Fell on the upturn'd faces of these roses
  That smiled and died in this parterre, enchanted
  By thee, and by the poetry of thy presence.

  Clad all in white, upon a violet bank
  I saw thee half-reclining; while the moon
  Fell on the upturn'd faces of the roses,
  And on thine own, upturn'd--alas, in sorrow!

  Was it not Fate, that, on this July midnight--
  Was it not Fate (whose name is also Sorrow),
  That bade me pause before that garden-gate,
  To breathe the incense of those slumbering roses?
  No footstep stirred: the hated world all slept,
  Save only thee and me--(O Heaven!--O God!
  How my heart beats in coupling those two words!)--
  Save only thee and me. I paused--I looked--
  And in an instant all things disappeared.
  (Ah, bear in mind this garden was enchanted!)
  The pearly lustre of the moon went out:
  The mossy banks and the meandering paths,
  The happy flowers and the repining trees,
  Were seen no more: the very roses' odors
  Died in the arms of the adoring airs.
  All--all expired save thee--save less than thou:
  Save only the divine light in thine eyes--
  Save but the soul in thine uplifted eyes.
  I saw but them--they were the world to me.
  I saw but them--saw only them for hours--
  Saw only them until the moon went down.
  What wild heart-histories seemed to lie unwritten
  Upon those crystalline, celestial spheres!
  How dark a woe! yet how sublime a hope!
  How silently serene a sea of pride!
  How daring an ambition! yet how deep--
  How fathomless a capacity for love!

  But now, at length, dear Dian sank from sight,
  Into a western couch of thunder-cloud;
  And thou, a ghost, amid the entombing trees
  Didst glide away. _Only thine eyes remained._
  They _would not_ go--they never yet have gone.
  Lighting my lonely pathway home that night,
  They have not left me (as my hopes have) since.
  They follow me--they lead me through the years.

  They are my ministers--yet I their slave.
  Their office is to illumine and enkindle--
  My duty, _to be saved_ by their bright light,
  And purified in their electric fire,
  And sanctified in their elysian fire.
  They fill my soul with Beauty (which is Hope),
  And are far up in Heaven--the stars I kneel to
  In the sad, silent watches of my night;
  While even in the meridian glare of day
  I see them still--two sweetly scintillant
  Venuses, unextinguished by the sun!
 It was many and many a year ago,
    In a kingdom by the sea,
  That a maiden there lived whom you may know
    By the name of ANNABEL LEE;
  And this maiden she lived with no other thought
    Than to love and be loved by me.

  I was a child and she was a child,
    In this kingdom by the sea:
  But we loved with a love that was more than love--
    I and my ANNABEL LEE;
  With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven
    Coveted her and me.

  And this was the reason that, long ago,
    In this kingdom by the sea,
  A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling
    My beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
  So that her highborn kinsmen came
    And bore her away from me,
  To shut her up in a sepulchre
    In this kingdom by the sea.

  The angels, not half so happy in heaven,
    Went envying her and me--
  Yes!--that was the reason (as all men know,
    In this kingdom by the sea)
  That the wind came out of the cloud by night,
    Chilling and killing my ANNABEL LEE.

  But our love it was stronger by far than the love
    Of those who were older than we--
    Of many far wiser than we--
  And neither the angels in heaven above,
    Nor the demons down under the sea,
  Can ever dissever my soul from the soul
    Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE.

  For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams
    Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
  And the stars never rise but I see the bright eyes
    Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
  And so, all the night-tide, I lie down by the side
  Of my darling, my darling, my life and my bride,
    In her sepulchre there by the sea--
    In her tomb by the side of the sea.
     For her this rhyme is penned, whose luminous eyes,
    Brightly expressive as the twins of Leda,
  Shall find her own sweet name, that, nestling lies
    Upon the page, enwrapped from every reader.
  Search narrowly the lines!--they hold a treasure
    Divine--a talisman--an amulet
  That must be worn _at heart_. Search well the measure--
    The words--the syllables! Do not forget
  The trivialest point, or you may lose your labor!
    And yet there is in this no Gordian knot
  Which one might not undo without a sabre,
    If one could merely comprehend the plot.
  Enwritten upon the leaf where now are peering
    Eyes scintillating soul, there lie perdus
  Three eloquent words oft uttered in the hearing
    Of poets by poets--as the name is a poet's, too.
  Its letters, although naturally lying
    Like the knight Pinto--Mendez Ferdinando--
  Still form a synonym for Truth--Cease trying!
    You will not read the riddle, though you do the best you can do.
 "Seldom we find," says Solomon Don Dunce,
      "Half an idea in the profoundest sonnet.
    Through all the flimsy things we see at once
      As easily as through a Naples bonnet--
      Trash of all trash!--how can a lady don it?
    Yet heavier far than your Petrarchan stuff--
    Owl-downy nonsense that the faintest puff
      Twirls into trunk-paper the while you con it."
    And, veritably, Sol is right enough.
    The general tuckermanities are arrant
    Bubbles--ephemeral and so transparent--
      But _this is_, now--you may depend upon it--
    Stable, opaque, immortal--all by dint
    Of the dear names that lie concealed within't.
Because I feel that, in the Heavens above,
    The angels, whispering to one another,
  Can find, among their burning terms of love,
    None so devotional as that of "Mother,"
  Therefore by that dear name I long have called you--
    You who are more than mother unto me,
  And fill my heart of hearts, where Death installed you,
    In setting my Virginia's spirit free.
  My mother--my own mother, who died early,
    Was but the mother of myself; but you
  Are mother to the one I loved so dearly,
    And thus are dearer than the mother I knew
  By that infinity with which my wife
    Was dearer to my soul than its soul-life.
  Thank Heaven! the crisis--
    The danger is past,
  And the lingering illness
    Is over at last--
  And the fever called "Living"
    Is conquered at last.

  Sadly, I know,
    I am shorn of my strength,
  And no muscle I move
    As I lie at full length--
  But no matter!--I feel
    I am better at length.

  And I rest so composedly,
    Now in my bed,
  That any beholder
    Might fancy me dead--
  Might start at beholding me
    Thinking me dead.

  The moaning and groaning,
    The sighing and sobbing,
  Are quieted now,
    With that horrible throbbing
  At heart:--ah, that horrible,
    Horrible throbbing!

  The sickness--the nausea--
    The pitiless pain--
  Have ceased, with the fever
    That maddened my brain--
  With the fever called "Living"
    That burned in my brain.

  And oh! of all tortures
    That torture the worst
  Has abated--the terrible
    Torture of thirst,
  For the naphthaline river
    Of Passion accurst:--
  I have drank of a water
    That quenches all thirst:--

  Of a water that flows,
    With a lullaby sound,
  From a spring but a very few
    Feet under ground--
  From a cavern not very far
    Down under ground.

  And ah! let it never
    Be foolishly said
  That my room it is gloomy
    And narrow my bed--
  For man never slept
    In a different bed;
  And, to sleep, you must slumber
    In just such a bed.

  My tantalized spirit
    Here blandly reposes,
  Forgetting, or never
    Regretting its roses--
  Its old agitations
    Of myrtles and roses:

  For now, while so quietly
    Lying, it fancies
  A holier odor
    About it, of pansies--
  A rosemary odor,
    Commingled with pansies--
  With rue and the beautiful
    Puritan pansies.

  And so it lies happily,
    Bathing in many
  A dream of the truth
    And the beauty of Annie--
  Drowned in a bath
    Of the tresses of Annie.

  She tenderly kissed me,
    She fondly caressed,
  And then I fell gently
    To sleep on her breast--
  Deeply to sleep
    From the heaven of her breast.

  When the light was extinguished,
    She covered me warm,
  And she prayed to the angels
    To keep me from harm--
  To the queen of the angels
    To shield me from harm.

  And I lie so composedly,
    Now in my bed
  (Knowing her love)
    That you fancy me dead--
  And I rest so contentedly,
    Now in my bed,
  (With her love at my breast)
    That you fancy me dead--
  That you shudder to look at me.
    Thinking me dead.

  But my heart it is brighter
    Than all of the many
  Stars in the sky,
    For it sparkles with Annie--
  It glows with the light
    Of the love of my Annie--
  With the thought of the light
    Of the eyes of my Annie.
 Beloved! amid the earnest woes
    That crowd around my earthly path--
  (Drear path, alas! where grows
  Not even one lonely rose)--
    My soul at least a solace hath
  In dreams of thee, and therein knows
  An Eden of bland repose.

  And thus thy memory is to me
    Like some enchanted far-off isle
  In some tumultuous sea--
  Some ocean throbbing far and free
    With storm--but where meanwhile
  Serenest skies continually
    Just o'er that one bright inland smile.

 Thou wouldst be loved?--then let thy heart
    From its present pathway part not;
  Being everything which now thou art,
    Be nothing which thou art not.
  So with the world thy gentle ways,
    Thy grace, thy more than beauty,
  Shall be an endless theme of praise.
    And love a simple duty.
 Gaily bedight,
    A gallant knight,
  In sunshine and in shadow,
    Had journeyed long,
    Singing a song,
  In search of Eldorado.
    But he grew old--
    This knight so bold--
  And o'er his heart a shadow
    Fell as he found
    No spot of ground
  That looked like Eldorado.

  And, as his strength
    Failed him at length,
  He met a pilgrim shadow--
    "Shadow," said he,
    "Where can it be--
  This land of Eldorado?"

    "Over the Mountains
    Of the Moon,
  Down the Valley of the Shadow,
    Ride, boldly ride,"
    The shade replied,
  "If you seek for Eldorado!"
 I dwelt alone
               In a world of moan,
           And my soul was a stagnant tide,
  Till the fair and gentle Eulalie became my blushing bride--
  Till the yellow-haired young Eulalie became my smiling bride.
               Ah, less--less bright
               The stars of the night
           Than the eyes of the radiant girl!
               And never a flake
               That the vapor can make
           With the moon-tints of purple and pearl,
  Can vie with the modest Eulalie's most unregarded curl--
  Can compare with the bright-eyed Eulalie's most humble and careless
    curl.
               Now Doubt--now Pain
               Come never again,
           For her soul gives me sigh for sigh,
               And all day long
               Shines, bright and strong,
           Astarté within the sky,
  While ever to her dear Eulalie upturns her matron eye--
  While ever to her young Eulalie upturns her violet eye.

Take this kiss upon the brow!
  And, in parting from you now,
  Thus much let me avow--
  You are not wrong, who deem
  That my days have been a dream:
  Yet if hope has flown away
  In a night, or in a day,
  In a vision or in none,
  Is it therefore the less gone?
  All that we see or seem
  Is but a dream within a dream.

  I stand amid the roar
  Of a surf-tormented shore,
  And I hold within my hand
  Grains of the golden sand--
  How few! yet how they creep
  Through my fingers to the deep
  While I weep--while I weep!
  O God! can I not grasp
  Them with a tighter clasp?
  O God! can I not save
  One from the pitiless wave?
  Is all that we see or seem
  But a dream within a dream?


  Of all who hail thy presence as the morning--
  Of all to whom thine absence is the night--
  The blotting utterly from out high heaven
  The sacred sun--of all who, weeping, bless thee
  Hourly for hope--for life--ah, above all,
  For the resurrection of deep buried faith
  In truth, in virtue, in humanity--
  Of all who, on despair's unhallowed bed
  Lying down to die, have suddenly arisen
  At thy soft-murmured words, "Let there be light!"
  At thy soft-murmured words that were fulfilled
  In thy seraphic glancing of thine eyes--
  Of all who owe thee most, whose gratitude
  Nearest resembles worship,--oh, remember
  The truest, the most fervently devoted,
  And think that these weak lines are written by him--
  By him who, as he pens them, thrills to think
  His spirit is communing with an angel's.

 Not long ago, the writer of these lines,
  In the mad pride of intellectuality,
  Maintained "the power of words"--denied that ever
  A thought arose within the human brain
  Beyond the utterance of the human tongue:
  And now, as if in mockery of that boast,
  Two words--two foreign soft dissyllables--
  Italian tones, made only to be murmured
  By angels dreaming in the moonlit "dew
  That hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill,"--
  Have stirred from out the abysses of his heart,
  Unthought-like thoughts that are the souls of thought,
  Richer, far wilder, far diviner visions
  Than even the seraph harper, Israfel,
  (Who has "the sweetest voice of all God's creatures,")
  Could hope to utter. And I! my spells are broken.
  The pen falls powerless from my shivering hand.
  With thy dear name as text, though hidden by thee,
  I cannot write--I cannot speak or think--
  Alas, I cannot feel; for 'tis not feeling,
  This standing motionless upon the golden
  Threshold of the wide-open gate of dreams,
  Gazing, entranced, adown the gorgeous vista,
  And thrilling as I see, upon the right,
  Upon the left, and all the way along,
  Amid empurpled vapors, far away
  To where the prospect terminates--_thee only_!

 Lo! Death has reared himself a throne
  In a strange city lying alone
  Far down within the dim West,
  Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best
  Have gone to their eternal rest.
  There shrines and palaces and towers
  (Time-eaten towers and tremble not!)
  Resemble nothing that is ours.
  Around, by lifting winds forgot,
  Resignedly beneath the sky
  The melancholy waters lie.

  No rays from the holy Heaven come down
  On the long night-time of that town;
  But light from out the lurid sea
  Streams up the turrets silently--
  Gleams up the pinnacles far and free--
  Up domes--up spires--up kingly halls--
  Up fanes--up Babylon-like walls--
  Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers
  Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers--
  Up many and many a marvellous shrine
  Whose wreathed friezes intertwine
  The viol, the violet, and the vine.

  Resignedly beneath the sky
  The melancholy waters lie.
  So blend the turrets and shadows there
  That all seem pendulous in air,
  While from a proud tower in the town
  Death looks gigantically down.

  There open fanes and gaping graves
  Yawn level with the luminous waves;
  But not the riches there that lie
  In each idol's diamond eye--
  Not the gaily-jewelled dead
  Tempt the waters from their bed;
  For no ripples curl, alas!
  Along that wilderness of glass--
  No swellings tell that winds may be
  Upon some far-off happier sea--
  No heavings hint that winds have been
  On seas less hideously serene.

  But lo, a stir is in the air!
  The wave--there is a movement there!
  As if the towers had thrust aside,
  In slightly sinking, the dull tide--
  As if their tops had feebly given
  A void within the filmy Heaven.
  The waves have now a redder glow--
  The hours are breathing faint and low--
  And when, amid no earthly moans,
  Down, down that town shall settle hence,
  Hell, rising from a thousand thrones,
  Shall do it reverence.

  At midnight, in the month of June,
  I stand beneath the mystic moon.
  An opiate vapor, dewy, dim,
  Exhales from out her golden rim,
  And, softly dripping, drop by drop,
  Upon the quiet mountain top,
  Steals drowsily and musically
  Into the universal valley.
  The rosemary nods upon the grave;
  The lily lolls upon the wave;
  Wrapping the fog about its breast,
  The ruin moulders into rest;
  Looking like Lethe, see! the lake
  A conscious slumber seems to take,
  And would not, for the world, awake.
  All Beauty sleeps!--and lo! where lies
  (Her casement open to the skies)
  Irene, with her Destinies!

  Oh, lady bright! can it be right--
  This window open to the night!
  The wanton airs, from the tree-top,
  Laughingly through the lattice-drop--
  The bodiless airs, a wizard rout,
  Flit through thy chamber in and out,
  And wave the curtain canopy
  So fitfully--so fearfully--
  Above the closed and fringed lid
  'Neath which thy slumb'ring soul lies hid,
  That, o'er the floor and down the wall,
  Like ghosts the shadows rise and fall!
  Oh, lady dear, hast thou no fear?
  Why and what art thou dreaming here?
  Sure thou art come o'er far-off seas,
  A wonder to these garden trees!
  Strange is thy pallor! strange thy dress!
  Strange, above all, thy length of tress,
  And this all-solemn silentness!

  The lady sleeps! Oh, may her sleep
  Which is enduring, so be deep!
  Heaven have her in its sacred keep!
  This chamber changed for one more holy,
  This bed for one more melancholy,
  I pray to God that she may lie
  For ever with unopened eye,
  While the dim sheeted ghosts go by!

  My love, she sleeps! Oh, may her sleep,
  As it is lasting, so be deep;
  Soft may the worms about her creep!
  Far in the forest, dim and old,
  For her may some tall vault unfold--
  Some vault that oft hath flung its black
  And winged panels fluttering back,
  Triumphant, o'er the crested palls,
  Of her grand family funerals--
  Some sepulchre, remote, alone,
  Against whose portal she hath thrown,
  In childhood many an idle stone--
  Some tomb from out whose sounding door
  She ne'er shall force an echo more,
  Thrilling to think, poor child of sin!
  It was the dead who groaned within.


  The ring is on my hand,
    And the wreath is on my brow;
  Satins and jewels grand
  Are all at my command.
    And I am happy now.

  And my lord he loves me well;
    But, when first he breathed his vow,
  I felt my bosom swell--
  For the words rang as a knell,
  And the voice seemed his who fell
  In the battle down the dell,
    And who is happy now.

  But he spoke to reassure me,
    And he kissed my pallid brow,
  While a reverie came o'er me,
  And to the churchyard bore me,
  And I sighed to him before me,
  Thinking him dead D'Elormie,
    "Oh, I am happy now!"

  And thus the words were spoken,
    And thus the plighted vow,
  And, though my faith be broken,
  And, though my heart be broken,
  Behold the golden keys
    That proves me happy now!

  Would to God I could awaken
    For I dream I know not how,
  And my soul is sorely shaken
  Lest an evil step be taken,--
  Lest the dead who is forsaken
    May not be happy now.
  Ah, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown forever!
  Let the bell toll!--a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river.
  And, Guy de Vere, hast thou no tear?--weep now or never more!
  See! on yon drear and rigid bier low lies thy love, Lenore!
  Come! let the burial rite be read--the funeral song be sung!--
  An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young--
  A dirge for her, the doubly dead in that she died so young.

  "Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth and hated her for her pride,
  And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her--that she died!
  How shall the ritual, then, be read?--the requiem how be sung
  By you--by yours, the evil eye,--by yours, the slanderous tongue
  That did to death the innocence that died, and died so young?"

  _Peccavimus;_ but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song
  Go up to God so solemnly the dead may feel no wrong!
  The sweet Lenore hath "gone before," with Hope, that flew beside,
  Leaving thee wild for the dear child that should have been thy bride--
  For her, the fair and _débonnaire_, that now so lowly lies,
  The life upon her yellow hair but not within her eyes--
  The life still there, upon her hair--the death upon her eyes.

  "Avaunt! to-night my heart is light. No dirge will I upraise,
  But waft the angel on her flight with a pæan of old days!
  Let no bell toll!--lest her sweet soul, amid its hallowed mirth,
  Should catch the note, as it doth float up from the damned Earth.
  To friends above, from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven--
  From Hell unto a high estate far up within the Heaven--
  From grief and groan to a golden throne beside the King of Heaven."

  Thou wast that all to me, love,
    For which my soul did pine--
  A green isle in the sea, love,
    A fountain and a shrine,
  All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers,
  And all the flowers were mine.

  Ah, dream too bright to last!
    Ah, starry Hope! that didst arise
  But to be overcast!
    A voice from out the Future cries,
  "On! on!"--but o'er the Past
    (Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies
  Mute, motionless, aghast!

  For, alas! alas! with me
    The light of Life is o'er!
  "No more--no more--no more"--
  (Such language holds the solemn sea
    To the sands upon the shore)
  Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree,
    Or the stricken eagle soar!

  And all my days are trances,
    And all my nightly dreams
  Are where thy dark eye glances,
    And where thy footstep gleams--
  In what ethereal dances,
    By what eternal streams!

  Alas! for that accursed time
    They bore thee o'er the billow,
  From love to titled age and crime,
    And an unholy pillow!
  From me, and from our misty clime,
    Where weeps the silver willow!


  Type of the antique Rome! Rich reliquary
  Of lofty contemplation left to Time
  By buried centuries of pomp and power!
  At length--at length--after so many days
  Of weary pilgrimage and burning thirst,
  (Thirst for the springs of lore that in thee lie,)
  I kneel, an altered and an humble man,
  Amid thy shadows, and so drink within
  My very soul thy grandeur, gloom, and glory!

  Vastness! and Age! and Memories of Eld!
  Silence! and Desolation! and dim Night!
  I feel ye now--I feel ye in your strength--
  O spells more sure than e'er Judæan king
  Taught in the gardens of Gethsemane!
  O charms more potent than the rapt Chaldee
  Ever drew down from out the quiet stars!

  Here, where a hero fell, a column falls!
  Here, where the mimic eagle glared in gold,
  A midnight vigil holds the swarthy bat!
  Here, where the dames of Rome their gilded hair
  Waved to the wind, now wave the reed and thistle!
  Here, where on golden throne the monarch lolled,
  Glides, spectre-like, unto his marble home,
  Lit by the wan light of the horned moon,
  The swift and silent lizard of the stones!

  But stay! these walls--these ivy-clad arcades--
  These mouldering plinths--these sad and blackened shafts--
  These vague entablatures--this crumbling frieze--
  These shattered cornices--this wreck--this ruin--
  These stones--alas! these gray stones--are they all--
  All of the famed, and the colossal left
  By the corrosive Hours to Fate and me?

  "Not all"--the Echoes answer me--"not all!
  Prophetic sounds and loud, arise forever
  From us, and from all Ruin, unto the wise,
  As melody from Memnon to the Sun.
  We rule the hearts of mightiest men--we rule
  With a despotic sway all giant minds.
  We are not impotent--we pallid stones.
  Not all our power is gone--not all our fame--
  Not all the magic of our high renown--
  Not all the wonder that encircles us--
  Not all the mysteries that in us lie--
  Not all the memories that hang upon
  And cling around about us as a garment,
  Clothing us in a robe of more than glory."

In the greenest of our valleys
    By good angels tenanted,
  Once a fair and stately palace--
    Radiant palace--reared its head.
  In the monarch Thought's dominion--
    It stood there!
  Never seraph spread a pinion
    Over fabric half so fair!

  Banners yellow, glorious, golden,
    On its roof did float and flow,
  (This--all this--was in the olden
    Time long ago),
  And every gentle air that dallied,
    In that sweet day,
  Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,
    A winged odor went away.

  Wanderers in that happy valley,
    Through two luminous windows, saw
  Spirits moving musically,
    To a lute's well-tunëd law,
  Bound about a throne where, sitting
    (Porphyrogene!)
  In state his glory well befitting,
    The ruler of the realm was seen.

  And all with pearl and ruby glowing
    Was the fair palace door,
  Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing,
    And sparkling evermore,
  A troop of Echoes, whose sweet duty
    Was but to sing,
  In voices of surpassing beauty,
    The wit and wisdom of their king.

  But evil things, in robes of sorrow,
    Assailed the monarch's high estate.
  (Ah, let us mourn!--for never morrow
    Shall dawn upon him desolate !)
  And round about his home the glory
    That blushed and bloomed,
  Is but a dim-remembered story
    Of the old time entombed.

  And travellers, now, within that valley,
    Through the red-litten windows see
  Vast forms, that move fantastically
    To a discordant melody,
    While, like a ghastly rapid river,
    Through the pale door
  A hideous throng rush out forever
    And laugh--but smile no more.

Lo! 'tis a gala night
    Within the lonesome latter years!
  An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
    In veils, and drowned in tears,
  Sit in a theatre, to see
    A play of hopes and fears,
  While the orchestra breathes fitfully
    The music of the spheres.

  Mimes, in the form of God on high,
    Mutter and mumble low,
  And hither and thither fly--
    Mere puppets they, who come and go
  At bidding of vast formless things
    That shift the scenery to and fro,
  Flapping from out their Condor wings
    Invisible Wo!

  That motley drama--oh, be sure
    It shall not be forgot!
  With its Phantom chased for evermore,
    By a crowd that seize it not,
  Through a circle that ever returneth in
    To the self-same spot,
  And much of Madness, and more of Sin,
    And Horror the soul of the plot.

  But see, amid the mimic rout
    A crawling shape intrude!
  A blood-red thing that writhes from out
    The scenic solitude!
  It writhes!--it writhes!--with mortal pangs
    The mimes become its food,
  And the angels sob at vermin fangs
    In human gore imbued.

  Out--out are the lights--out all!
    And, over each quivering form,
  The curtain, a funeral pall,
    Comes down with the rush of a storm,
  And the angels, all pallid and wan,
    Uprising, unveiling, affirm
  That the play is the tragedy, "Man,"
    And its hero the Conqueror Worm.


  There are some qualities--some incorporate things,
    That have a double life, which thus is made
  A type of that twin entity which springs
    From matter and light, evinced in solid and shade.
  There is a twofold Silence--sea and shore--
    Body and soul. One dwells in lonely places,
    Newly with grass o'ergrown; some solemn graces,
  Some human memories and tearful lore,
  Render him terrorless: his name's "No More."
  He is the corporate Silence: dread him not!
    No power hath he of evil in himself;
  But should some urgent fate (untimely lot!)
    Bring thee to meet his shadow (nameless elf,
  That haunteth the lone regions where hath trod
  No foot of man), commend thyself to God!

  By a route obscure and lonely,
  Haunted by ill angels only,
  Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT,
  On a black throne reigns upright,
  I have reached these lands but newly
  From an ultimate dim Thule--
  From a wild weird clime that lieth, sublime,
    Out of SPACE--out of TIME.

  Bottomless vales and boundless floods,
  And chasms, and caves, and Titan woods,
  With forms that no man can discover
  For the dews that drip all over;
  Mountains toppling evermore
  Into seas without a shore;
  Seas that restlessly aspire,
  Surging, unto skies of fire;
  Lakes that endlessly outspread
  Their lone waters--lone and dead,
  Their still waters--still and chilly
  With the snows of the lolling lily.

  By the lakes that thus outspread
  Their lone waters, lone and dead,--
  Their sad waters, sad and chilly
  With the snows of the lolling lily,--

  By the mountains--near the river
  Murmuring lowly, murmuring ever,--
  By the gray woods,--by the swamp
  Where the toad and the newt encamp,--
  By the dismal tarns and pools
    Where dwell the Ghouls,--
  By each spot the most unholy--
  In each nook most melancholy,--

  There the traveller meets aghast
  Sheeted Memories of the past--
  Shrouded forms that start and sigh
  As they pass the wanderer by--
  White-robed forms of friends long given,
  In agony, to the Earth--and Heaven.

  For the heart whose woes are legion
  'Tis a peaceful, soothing region--
  For the spirit that walks in shadow
  'Tis--oh, 'tis an Eldorado!
  But the traveller, travelling through it,
  May not--dare not openly view it;
  Never its mysteries are exposed
  To the weak human eye unclosed;
  So wills its King, who hath forbid
  The uplifting of the fringed lid;
  And thus the sad Soul that here passes
  Beholds it but through darkened glasses.

  By a route obscure and lonely,
  Haunted by ill angels only.

  Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT,
  On a black throne reigns upright,
  I have wandered home but newly
  From this ultimate dim Thule.

  Fair isle, that from the fairest of all flowers,
    Thy gentlest of all gentle names dost take!
  How many memories of what radiant hours
    At sight of thee and thine at once awake!
  How many scenes of what departed bliss!
    How many thoughts of what entombed hopes!
  How many visions of a maiden that is
    No more--no more upon thy verdant slopes!

  _No more!_ alas, that magical sad sound
    Transforming all! Thy charms shall please _no more_--
  Thy memory _no more!_ Accursed ground
    Henceforward I hold thy flower-enamelled shore,
  O hyacinthine isle! O purple Zante!
    "Isola d'oro! Fior di Levante!"

  At morn--at noon--at twilight dim--
  Maria! thou hast heard my hymn!
  In joy and wo--in good and ill--
  Mother of God, be with me still!
  When the Hours flew brightly by,
  And not a cloud obscured the sky,
  My soul, lest it should truant be,
  Thy grace did guide to thine and thee
  Now, when storms of Fate o'ercast
  Darkly my Present and my Past,
  Let my future radiant shine
  With sweet hopes of thee and thine!


  SCIENCE! true daughter of Old Time thou art!
    Who alterest all things with thy peering eyes.
  Why preyest thou thus upon the poet's heart,
    Vulture, whose wings are dull realities
  How should he love thee? or how deem thee wise,
    Who wouldst not leave him in his wandering
  To seek for treasure in the jewelled skies,
    Albeit he soared with an undaunted wing!
  Hast thou not dragged Diana from her car?
    And driven the Hamadryad from the wood
  To seek a shelter in some happier star?
    Hast thou not torn the Naiad from her flood,
  The Elfin from the green grass, and from me
  The summer dream beneath the tamarind tree?

O! nothing earthly save the ray
  (Thrown back from flowers) of Beauty's eye,
  As in those gardens where the day
  Springs from the gems of Circassy--
  O! nothing earthly save the thrill
  Of melody in woodland rill--
  Or (music of the passion-hearted)
  Joy's voice so peacefully departed
  That like the murmur in the shell,
  Its echo dwelleth and will dwell--
  O! nothing of the dross of ours--
  Yet all the beauty--all the flowers
  That list our Love, and deck our bowers--
  Adorn yon world afar, afar--
  The wandering star.

  'Twas a sweet time for Nesace--for there
  Her world lay lolling on the golden air,
  Near four bright suns--a temporary rest--
  An oasis in desert of the blest.
  Away away--'mid seas of rays that roll
  Empyrean splendor o'er th' unchained soul--
  The soul that scarce (the billows are so dense)
  Can struggle to its destin'd eminence--
  To distant spheres, from time to time, she rode,
  And late to ours, the favour'd one of God--
  But, now, the ruler of an anchor'd realm,
  She throws aside the sceptre--leaves the helm,
  And, amid incense and high spiritual hymns,
  Laves in quadruple light her angel limbs.

  Now happiest, loveliest in yon lovely Earth,
  Whence sprang the "Idea of Beauty" into birth,
  (Falling in wreaths thro' many a startled star,
  Like woman's hair 'mid pearls, until, afar,
  It lit on hills Achaian, and there dwelt),
  She look'd into Infinity--and knelt.
  Rich clouds, for canopies, about her curled--
  Fit emblems of the model of her world--
  Seen but in beauty--not impeding sight--
  Of other beauty glittering thro' the light--
  A wreath that twined each starry form around,
  And all the opal'd air in color bound.

  All hurriedly she knelt upon a bed
  Of flowers: of lilies such as rear'd the head
  On the fair Capo Deucato, and sprang
  So eagerly around about to hang
  Upon the flying footsteps of--deep pride--
  Of her who lov'd a mortal--and so died .
  The Sephalica, budding with young bees,
  Uprear'd its purple stem around her knees:
  And gemmy flower, of Trebizond misnam'd --
  Inmate of highest stars, where erst it sham'd
  All other loveliness: its honied dew
  (The fabled nectar that the heathen knew)
  Deliriously sweet, was dropp'd from Heaven,
  And fell on gardens of the unforgiven
  In Trebizond--and on a sunny flower
  So like its own above that, to this hour,
  It still remaineth, torturing the bee
  With madness, and unwonted reverie:
  In Heaven, and all its environs, the leaf
  And blossom of the fairy plant, in grief
  Disconsolate linger--grief that hangs her head,
  Repenting follies that full long have fled,
  Heaving her white breast to the balmy air,
  Like guilty beauty, chasten'd, and more fair:
  Nyctanthes too, as sacred as the light
  She fears to perfume, perfuming the night:
  And Clytia  pondering between many a sun,
  While pettish tears adown her petals run:
  And that aspiring flower that sprang on Earth --
  And died, ere scarce exalted into birth,
  Bursting its odorous heart in spirit to wing
  Its way to Heaven, from garden of a king:
  And Valisnerian lotus thither flown
  From struggling with the waters of the Rhone:
  And thy most lovely purple perfume, Zante !
  Isola d'oro!--Fior di Levante!
  And the Nelumbo bud that floats for ever
  With Indian Cupid down the holy river--
  Fair flowers, and fairy! to whose care is given
  To bear the Goddess' song, in odors, up to Heaven :

    "Spirit! that dwellest where,
      In the deep sky,
    The terrible and fair,
      In beauty vie!
    Beyond the line of blue--
      The boundary of the star
    Which turneth at the view
      Of thy barrier and thy bar--
    Of the barrier overgone
      By the comets who were cast
    From their pride, and from their throne
      To be drudges till the last--
    To be carriers of fire
      (The red fire of their heart)
    With speed that may not tire
      And with pain that shall not part--
    Who livest--that we know--
      In Eternity--we feel--
    But the shadow of whose brow
      What spirit shall reveal?
    Tho' the beings whom thy Nesace,
      Thy messenger hath known
    Have dream'd for thy Infinity
      A model of their own --
    Thy will is done, O God!
      The star hath ridden high
    Thro' many a tempest, but she rode
      Beneath thy burning eye;
    And here, in thought, to thee--
      In thought that can alone
    Ascend thy empire and so be
      A partner of thy throne--
    By winged Fantasy,
       My embassy is given,
    Till secrecy shall knowledge be
      In the environs of Heaven."

  She ceas'd--and buried then her burning cheek
  Abash'd, amid the lilies there, to seek
  A shelter from the fervor of His eye;
  For the stars trembled at the Deity.
  She stirr'd not--breath'd not--for a voice was there
  How solemnly pervading the calm air!
  A sound of silence on the startled ear
  Which dreamy poets name "the music of the sphere."
  Ours is a world of words: Quiet we call
  "Silence"--which is the merest word of all.

  All Nature speaks, and ev'n ideal things
  Flap shadowy sounds from the visionary wings--
  But ah! not so when, thus, in realms on high
  The eternal voice of God is passing by,
  And the red winds are withering in the sky!
  "What tho' in worlds which sightless cycles run,
  Link'd to a little system, and one sun--
  Where all my love is folly, and the crowd
  Still think my terrors but the thunder cloud,
  The storm, the earthquake, and the ocean-wrath
  (Ah! will they cross me in my angrier path?)
  What tho' in worlds which own a single sun
  The sands of time grow dimmer as they run,
  Yet thine is my resplendency, so given
  To bear my secrets thro' the upper Heaven.
  Leave tenantless thy crystal home, and fly,
  With all thy train, athwart the moony sky--
  Apart--like fire-flies in Sicilian night,
  And wing to other worlds another light!
  Divulge the secrets of thy embassy
  To the proud orbs that twinkle--and so be
  To ev'ry heart a barrier and a ban
  Lest the stars totter in the guilt of man!"

   Up rose the maiden in the yellow night,
  The single-mooned eve!-on earth we plight
  Our faith to one love--and one moon adore--
  The birth-place of young Beauty had no more.
  As sprang that yellow star from downy hours,
  Up rose the maiden from her shrine of flowers,
  And bent o'er sheeny mountain and dim plain
  Her way--but left not yet her Therasæan reign

 High on a mountain of enamell'd head--
  Such as the drowsy shepherd on his bed
  Of giant pasturage lying at his ease,
  Raising his heavy eyelid, starts and sees
  With many a mutter'd "hope to be forgiven"
  What time the moon is quadrated in Heaven--
  Of rosy head, that towering far away
  Into the sunlit ether, caught the ray
  Of sunken suns at eve--at noon of night,
  While the moon danc'd with the fair stranger light--
  Uprear'd upon such height arose a pile
  Of gorgeous columns on th' uuburthen'd air,
  Flashing from Parian marble that twin smile
  Far down upon the wave that sparkled there,
  And nursled the young mountain in its lair.
  Of molten stars their pavement, such as fall
  Thro' the ebon air, besilvering the pall
  Of their own dissolution, while they die--
  Adorning then the dwellings of the sky.
  A dome, by linked light from Heaven let down,
  Sat gently on these columns as a crown--
  A window of one circular diamond, there,
  Look'd out above into the purple air
  And rays from God shot down that meteor chain
  And hallow'd all the beauty twice again,
  Save when, between th' Empyrean and that ring,
  Some eager spirit flapp'd his dusky wing.
  But on the pillars Seraph eyes have seen
  The dimness of this world: that grayish green
  That Nature loves the best for Beauty's grave
  Lurk'd in each cornice, round each architrave--
  And every sculptured cherub thereabout
  That from his marble dwelling peered out,
  Seem'd earthly in the shadow of his niche--
  Achaian statues in a world so rich?
  Friezes from Tadmor and Persepolis --
  From Balbec, and the stilly, clear abyss
  Of beautiful Gomorrah! Oh, the wave
  Is now upon thee--but too late to save!
  Sound loves to revel in a summer night:
  Witness the murmur of the gray twilight
  That stole upon the ear, in Eyraco,
  Of many a wild star-gazer long ago--
  That stealeth ever on the ear of him
  Who, musing, gazeth on the distance dim,
  And sees the darkness coming as a cloud--
  Is not its form--its voice--most palpable and loud?
   But what is this?--it cometh--and it brings
  A music with it--'tis the rush of wings--
  A pause--and then a sweeping, falling strain,
  And Nesace is in her halls again.
  From the wild energy of wanton haste
  Her cheeks were flushing, and her lips apart;
  The zone that clung around her gentle waist
  Had burst beneath the heaving of her heart.
  Within the centre of that hall to breathe
  She paus'd and panted, Zanthe! all beneath,
  The fairy light that kiss'd her golden hair
  And long'd to rest, yet could but sparkle there!

  Young flowers were whispering in melody
  To happy flowers that night--and tree to tree;
  Fountains were gushing music as they fell
  In many a star-lit grove, or moon-light dell;
  Yet silence came upon material things--
  Fair flowers, bright waterfalls and angel wings--
  And sound alone that from the spirit sprang
  Bore burthen to the charm the maiden sang:

    "Neath blue-bell or streamer--
      Or tufted wild spray
    That keeps, from the dreamer,
      The moonbeam away--
    Bright beings! that ponder,
      With half-closing eyes,
    On the stars which your wonder
      Hath drawn from the skies,
    Till they glance thro' the shade, and
      Come down to your brow
    Like--eyes of the maiden
      Who calls on you now--
    Arise! from your dreaming
      In violet bowers,
    To duty beseeming
      These star-litten hours--
    And shake from your tresses
      Encumber'd with dew

    The breath of those kisses
      That cumber them too--
    (O! how, without you, Love!
      Could angels be blest?)
    Those kisses of true love
      That lull'd ye to rest!
    Up! shake from your wing
      Each hindering thing:
    The dew of the night--
      It would weigh down your flight;
    And true love caresses--
      O! leave them apart!
    They are light on the tresses,
      But lead on the heart.

    Ligeia! Ligeia!
      My beautiful one!
    Whose harshest idea
      Will to melody run,
    O! is it thy will
      On the breezes to toss?
    Or, capriciously still,
      Like the lone Albatross,
    Incumbent on night
      (As she on the air)
    To keep watch with delight
      On the harmony there?

    Ligeia! wherever
      Thy image may be,
    No magic shall sever
      Thy music from thee.
    Thou hast bound many eyes
      In a dreamy sleep--
    But the strains still arise
      Which thy vigilance keep--

    The sound of the rain
      Which leaps down to the flower,
    And dances again
      In the rhythm of the shower--
    The murmur that springs
      From the growing of grass
    Are the music of things--
      But are modell'd, alas!
    Away, then, my dearest,
      O! hie thee away
    To springs that lie clearest
      Beneath the moon-ray--
    To lone lake that smiles,
      In its dream of deep rest,
    At the many star-isles
    That enjewel its breast--
    Where wild flowers, creeping,
      Have mingled their shade,
    On its margin is sleeping
      Full many a maid--
    Some have left the cool glade, and
      Have slept with the bee--
    Arouse them, my maiden,
      On moorland and lea--

    Go! breathe on their slumber,
      All softly in ear,
    The musical number
      They slumber'd to hear--
    For what can awaken
      An angel so soon
    Whose sleep hath been taken
      Beneath the cold moon,
    As the spell which no slumber
      Of witchery may test,
    The rhythmical number
      Which lull'd him to rest?"

  Spirits in wing, and angels to the view,
  A thousand seraphs burst th' Empyrean thro',
  Young dreams still hovering on their drowsy flight--
  Seraphs in all but "Knowledge," the keen light
  That fell, refracted, thro' thy bounds afar,
  O death! from eye of God upon that star;
  Sweet was that error--sweeter still that death--
  Sweet was that error--ev'n with us the breath
  Of Science dims the mirror of our joy--
  To them 'twere the Simoom, and would destroy--
  For what (to them) availeth it to know
  That Truth is Falsehood--or that Bliss is Woe?
  Sweet was their death--with them to die was rife
  With the last ecstasy of satiate life--
  Beyond that death no immortality--
  But sleep that pondereth and is not "to be"--
  And there--oh! may my weary spirit dwell--
  Apart from Heaven's Eternity--and yet how far from Hell!

  What guilty spirit, in what shrubbery dim
  Heard not the stirring summons of that hymn?
  But two: they fell: for heaven no grace imparts
  To those who hear not for their beating hearts.
  A maiden-angel and her seraph-lover--
  O! where (and ye may seek the wide skies over)
  Was Love, the blind, near sober Duty known?
  Unguided Love hath fallen--'mid "tears of perfect moan."

  He was a goodly spirit--he who fell:
  A wanderer by mossy-mantled well--
  A gazer on the lights that shine above--
  A dreamer in the moonbeam by his love:
  What wonder? for each star is eye-like there,
  And looks so sweetly down on Beauty's hair--
  And they, and ev'ry mossy spring were holy
  To his love-haunted heart and melancholy.
  The night had found (to him a night of wo)
  Upon a mountain crag, young Angelo--
  Beetling it bends athwart the solemn sky,
  And scowls on starry worlds that down beneath it lie.
  Here sate he with his love--his dark eye bent
  With eagle gaze along the firmament:
  Now turn'd it upon her--but ever then
  It trembled to the orb of EARTH again.

  "Ianthe, dearest, see! how dim that ray!
  How lovely 'tis to look so far away!
  She seemed not thus upon that autumn eve
  I left her gorgeous halls--nor mourned to leave,
  That eve--that eve--I should remember well--
  The sun-ray dropped, in Lemnos with a spell
  On th' Arabesque carving of a gilded hall
  Wherein I sate, and on the draperied wall--
  And on my eyelids--O, the heavy light!
  How drowsily it weighed them into night!
  On flowers, before, and mist, and love they ran
  With Persian Saadi in his Gulistan:
  But O, that light!--I slumbered--Death, the while,
  Stole o'er my senses in that lovely isle
  So softly that no single silken hair
  Awoke that slept--or knew that he was there.

  "The last spot of Earth's orb I trod upon
  Was a proud temple called the Parthenon;
  More beauty clung around her columned wall
  Then even thy glowing bosom beats withal,
  And when old Time my wing did disenthral
  Thence sprang I--as the eagle from his tower,
  And years I left behind me in an hour.
  What time upon her airy bounds I hung,
  One half the garden of her globe was flung
  Unrolling as a chart unto my view--
  Tenantless cities of the desert too!
  Ianthe, beauty crowded on me then,
  And half I wished to be again of men."

  "My Angelo! and why of them to be?
  A brighter dwelling-place is here for thee--
  And greener fields than in yon world above,
  And woman's loveliness--and passionate love."
  "But list, Ianthe! when the air so soft
  Failed, as my pennoned spirit leapt aloft,
  Perhaps my brain grew dizzy--but the world
  I left so late was into chaos hurled,
  Sprang from her station, on the winds apart,
  And rolled a flame, the fiery Heaven athwart.
  Methought, my sweet one, then I ceased to soar,
  And fell--not swiftly as I rose before,
  But with a downward, tremulous motion thro'
  Light, brazen rays, this golden star unto!
  Nor long the measure of my falling hours,
  For nearest of all stars was thine to ours--
  Dread star! that came, amid a night of mirth,
  A red Daedalion on the timid Earth."

  "We came--and to thy Earth--but not to us
  Be given our lady's bidding to discuss:
  We came, my love; around, above, below,
  Gay fire-fly of the night we come and go,
  Nor ask a reason save the angel-nod
  She grants to us as granted by her God--
  But, Angelo, than thine gray Time unfurled
  Never his fairy wing o'er fairer world!
  Dim was its little disk, and angel eyes
  Alone could see the phantom in the skies,
  When first Al Aaraaf knew her course to be
  Headlong thitherward o'er the starry sea--
  But when its glory swelled upon the sky,
  As glowing Beauty's bust beneath man's eye,
  We paused before the heritage of men,
  And thy star trembled--as doth Beauty then!"

  Thus in discourse, the lovers whiled away
  The night that waned and waned and brought no day.
  They fell: for Heaven to them no hope imparts
  Who hear not for the beating of their hearts.

Kind solace in a dying hour!
  Such, father, is not (now) my theme--
  I will not madly deem that power
  Of Earth may shrive me of the sin
  Unearthly pride hath revelled in--
  I have no time to dote or dream:
  You call it hope--that fire of fire!
  It is but agony of desire:
  If I can hope--O God! I can--
  Its fount is holier--more divine--
  I would not call thee fool, old man,
  But such is not a gift of thine.

  Know thou the secret of a spirit
  Bowed from its wild pride into shame
  O yearning heart! I did inherit
  Thy withering portion with the fame,
  The searing glory which hath shone
  Amid the Jewels of my throne,
  Halo of Hell! and with a pain
  Not Hell shall make me fear again--
  O craving heart, for the lost flowers
  And sunshine of my summer hours!
  The undying voice of that dead time,
  With its interminable chime,
  Rings, in the spirit of a spell,
  Upon thy emptiness--a knell.

  I have not always been as now:
  The fevered diadem on my brow
  I claimed and won usurpingly--
  Hath not the same fierce heirdom given
  Rome to the Cæsar--this to me?
  The heritage of a kingly mind,
  And a proud spirit which hath striven
  Triumphantly with human kind.
  On mountain soil I first drew life:
  The mists of the Taglay have shed
  Nightly their dews upon my head,
  And, I believe, the winged strife
  And tumult of the headlong air
  Have nestled in my very hair.

  So late from Heaven--that dew--it fell
  ('Mid dreams of an unholy night)
  Upon me with the touch of Hell,
  While the red flashing of the light
  From clouds that hung, like banners, o'er,
  Appeared to my half-closing eye
  The pageantry of monarchy;
  And the deep trumpet-thunder's roar
  Came hurriedly upon me, telling
  Of human battle, where my voice,
  My own voice, silly child!--was swelling
  (O! how my spirit would rejoice,
  And leap within me at the cry)
  The battle-cry of Victory!

  The rain came down upon my head
  Unsheltered--and the heavy wind
  Rendered me mad and deaf and blind.
  It was but man, I thought, who shed
  Laurels upon me: and the rush--
  The torrent of the chilly air
  Gurgled within my ear the crush
  Of empires--with the captive's prayer--
  The hum of suitors--and the tone
  Of flattery 'round a sovereign's throne.

  My passions, from that hapless hour,
  Usurped a tyranny which men
  Have deemed since I have reached to power,
  My innate nature--be it so:
  But, father, there lived one who, then,
  Then--in my boyhood--when their fire
  Burned with a still intenser glow
  (For passion must, with youth, expire)
  E'en then who knew this iron heart
  In woman's weakness had a part.

  I have no words--alas!--to tell
  The loveliness of loving well!
  Nor would I now attempt to trace
  The more than beauty of a face
  Whose lineaments, upon my mind,
  Are--shadows on th' unstable wind:
  Thus I remember having dwelt
  Some page of early lore upon,
  With loitering eye, till I have felt
  The letters--with their meaning--melt
  To fantasies--with none.

  O, she was worthy of all love!
  Love as in infancy was mine--
  'Twas such as angel minds above
  Might envy; her young heart the shrine
  On which my every hope and thought
  Were incense--then a goodly gift,
  For they were childish and upright--
  Pure--as her young example taught:
  Why did I leave it, and, adrift,
  Trust to the fire within, for light?

  We grew in age--and love--together--
  Roaming the forest, and the wild;
  My breast her shield in wintry weather--
  And, when the friendly sunshine smiled.
  And she would mark the opening skies,
  I saw no Heaven--but in her eyes.
  Young Love's first lesson is----the heart:
  For 'mid that sunshine, and those smiles,
  When, from our little cares apart,
  And laughing at her girlish wiles,
  I'd throw me on her throbbing breast,
  And pour my spirit out in tears--
  There was no need to speak the rest--
  No need to quiet any fears
  Of her--who asked no reason why,
  But turned on me her quiet eye!

  Yet more than worthy of the love
  My spirit struggled with, and strove
  When, on the mountain peak, alone,
  Ambition lent it a new tone--
  I had no being--but in thee:
  The world, and all it did contain
  In the earth--the air--the sea--
  Its joy--its little lot of pain
  That was new pleasure--the ideal,
  Dim, vanities of dreams by night--
  And dimmer nothings which were real--
  (Shadows--and a more shadowy light!)
  Parted upon their misty wings,
  And, so, confusedly, became
  Thine image and--a name--a name!
  Two separate--yet most intimate things.

  I was ambitious--have you known
  The passion, father? You have not:
  A cottager, I marked a throne
  Of half the world as all my own,
  And murmured at such lowly lot--
  But, just like any other dream,
  Upon the vapor of the dew
  My own had past, did not the beam
  Of beauty which did while it thro'
  The minute--the hour--the day--oppress
  My mind with double loveliness.

  We walked together on the crown
  Of a high mountain which looked down
  Afar from its proud natural towers
  Of rock and forest, on the hills--
  The dwindled hills! begirt with bowers
  And shouting with a thousand rills.

  I spoke to her of power and pride,
  But mystically--in such guise
  That she might deem it nought beside
  The moment's converse; in her eyes
  I read, perhaps too carelessly--
  A mingled feeling with my own--
  The flush on her bright cheek, to me
  Seemed to become a queenly throne
  Too well that I should let it be
  Light in the wilderness alone.

  I wrapped myself in grandeur then,
  And donned a visionary crown--
  Yet it was not that Fantasy
  Had thrown her mantle over me--
  But that, among the rabble--men,
  Lion ambition is chained down--
  And crouches to a keeper's hand--
  Not so in deserts where the grand--
  The wild--the terrible conspire
  With their own breath to fan his fire.

  Look 'round thee now on Samarcand!--
  Is she not queen of Earth? her pride
  Above all cities? in her hand
  Their destinies? in all beside
  Of glory which the world hath known
  Stands she not nobly and alone?
  Falling--her veriest stepping-stone
  Shall form the pedestal of a throne--
  And who her sovereign? Timour--he
  Whom the astonished people saw
  Striding o'er empires haughtily
  A diademed outlaw!

  O, human love! thou spirit given,
  On Earth, of all we hope in Heaven!
  Which fall'st into the soul like rain
  Upon the Siroc-withered plain,
  And, failing in thy power to bless,
  But leav'st the heart a wilderness!
  Idea! which bindest life around
  With music of so strange a sound
  And beauty of so wild a birth--
  Farewell! for I have won the Earth.

  When Hope, the eagle that towered, could see
  No cliff beyond him in the sky,
  His pinions were bent droopingly--
  And homeward turned his softened eye.
  'Twas sunset: When the sun will part
  There comes a sullenness of heart
  To him who still would look upon
  The glory of the summer sun.
  That soul will hate the ev'ning mist
  So often lovely, and will list
  To the sound of the coming darkness (known
  To those whose spirits hearken) as one
  Who, in a dream of night, would fly,
  But cannot, from a danger nigh.

  What tho' the moon--tho' the white moon
  Shed all the splendor of her noon,
  Her smile is chilly--and her beam,
  In that time of dreariness, will seem
  (So like you gather in your breath)
  A portrait taken after death.
  And boyhood is a summer sun
  Whose waning is the dreariest one--
  For all we live to know is known,
  And all we seek to keep hath flown--
  Let life, then, as the day-flower, fall
  With the noon-day beauty--which is all.
  I reached my home--my home no more--
  For all had flown who made it so.
  I passed from out its mossy door,
  And, tho' my tread was soft and low,
  A voice came from the threshold stone
  Of one whom I had earlier known--
  O, I defy thee, Hell, to show
  On beds of fire that burn below,
  An humbler heart--a deeper woe.

  Father, I firmly do believe--
  I know--for Death who comes for me
  From regions of the blest afar,
  Where there is nothing to deceive,
  Hath left his iron gate ajar.
  And rays of truth you cannot see
  Are flashing thro' Eternity----
  I do believe that Eblis hath
  A snare in every human path--
  Else how, when in the holy grove
  I wandered of the idol, Love,--
  Who daily scents his snowy wings
  With incense of burnt-offerings
  From the most unpolluted things,
  Whose pleasant bowers are yet so riven
  Above with trellised rays from Heaven
  No mote may shun--no tiniest fly--
  The light'ning of his eagle eye--
  How was it that Ambition crept,
  Unseen, amid the revels there,
  Till growing bold, he laughed and leapt
  In the tangles of Love's very hair!


 Helen, thy beauty is to me
    Like those Nicean barks of yore,
  That gently, o'er a perfumed sea,
    The weary, wayworn wanderer bore
    To his own native shore.

  On desperate seas long wont to roam,
    Thy hyacinth hair, thy classic face,
  Thy Naiad airs have brought me home
    To the glory that was Greece,
  To the grandeur that was Rome.

  Lo! in yon brilliant window niche,
    How statue-like I see thee stand,
    The agate lamp within thy hand!
  Ah, Psyche, from the regions which
    Are Holy Land!

 Once it smiled a silent dell
  Where the people did not dwell;
  They had gone unto the wars,
  Trusting to the mild-eyed stars,
  Nightly, from their azure towers,
  To keep watch above the flowers,
  In the midst of which all day
  The red sun-light lazily lay,
  Now each visitor shall confess
  The sad valley's restlessness.
  Nothing there is motionless--
  Nothing save the airs that brood
  Over the magic solitude.
  Ah, by no wind are stirred those trees
  That palpitate like the chill seas
  Around the misty Hebrides!
  Ah, by no wind those clouds are driven
  That rustle through the unquiet Heaven
  Unceasingly, from morn till even,
  Over the violets there that lie
  In myriad types of the human eye--
  Over the lilies that wave
  And weep above a nameless grave!
  They wave:--from out their fragrant tops
  Eternal dews come down in drops.
  They weep:--from off their delicate stems
  Perennial tears descend in gems.


 In Heaven a spirit doth dwell
    "Whose heart-strings are a lute;"
  None sing so wildly well
  As the angel Israfel,
  And the giddy Stars (so legends tell),
  Ceasing their hymns, attend the spell
    Of his voice, all mute.

  Tottering above
    In her highest noon,
    The enamoured Moon
  Blushes with love,
    While, to listen, the red levin
    (With the rapid Pleiads, even,
    Which were seven),
    Pauses in Heaven.

  And they say (the starry choir
    And the other listening things)
  That Israfeli's fire
  Is owing to that lyre
    By which he sits and sings--
  The trembling living wire
  Of those unusual strings.

  But the skies that angel trod,
    Where deep thoughts are a duty--
  Where Love's a grow-up God--
    Where the Houri glances are
  Imbued with all the beauty
    Which we worship in a star.

  Therefore, thou art not wrong,
    Israfeli, who despisest
  An unimpassioned song;
  To thee the laurels belong,
    Best bard, because the wisest!
  Merrily live and long!

  The ecstasies above
    With thy burning measures suit--
  Thy grief, thy joy, thy hate, thy love,
    With the fervor of thy lute--
    Well may the stars be mute!

  Yes, Heaven is thine; but this
    Is a world of sweets and sours;
    Our flowers are merely--flowers,
  And the shadow of thy perfect bliss
    Is the sunshine of ours.

  If I could dwell
  Where Israfel
    Hath dwelt, and he where I,
  He might not sing so wildly well
    A mortal melody,
  While a bolder note than this might swell
    From my lyre within the sky.

 I heed not that my earthly lot
    Hath--little of Earth in it--
  That years of love have been forgot
    In the hatred of a minute:--
  I mourn not that the desolate
    Are happier, sweet, than I,
  But that you sorrow for my fate
    Who am a passer-by.


  Fair river! in thy bright, clear flow
    Of crystal, wandering water,
  Thou art an emblem of the glow
        Of beauty--the unhidden heart--
        The playful maziness of art
    In old Alberto's daughter;

  But when within thy wave she looks--
    Which glistens then, and trembles--
  Why, then, the prettiest of brooks
    Her worshipper resembles;
  For in his heart, as in thy stream,
    Her image deeply lies--
  His heart which trembles at the beam
    Of her soul-searching eyes.


  I saw thee on thy bridal day--
    When a burning blush came o'er thee,
  Though happiness around thee lay,
    The world all love before thee:

  And in thine eye a kindling light
    (Whatever it might be)
  Was all on Earth my aching sight
    Of Loveliness could see.

  That blush, perhaps, was maiden shame--
    As such it well may pass--
  Though its glow hath raised a fiercer flame
    In the breast of him, alas!

  Who saw thee on that bridal day,
    When that deep blush _would_ come o'er thee,
  Though happiness around thee lay,
    The world all love before thee.

 Thy soul shall find itself alone
  'Mid dark thoughts of the gray tombstone
  Not one, of all the crowd, to pry
  Into thine hour of secrecy.
  Be silent in that solitude
    Which is not loneliness--for then
  The spirits of the dead who stood
    In life before thee are again
  In death around thee--and their will
  Shall overshadow thee: be still.
  The night--tho' clear--shall frown--
  And the stars shall not look down
  From their high thrones in the Heaven,
  With light like Hope to mortals given--
  But their red orbs, without beam,
  To thy weariness shall seem
  As a burning and a fever
  Which would cling to thee forever.
  Now are thoughts thou shalt not banish--
  Now are visions ne'er to vanish--
  From thy spirit shall they pass
  No more--like dew-drops from the grass.
  The breeze--the breath of God--is still--
  And the mist upon the hill
  Shadowy--shadowy--yet unbroken,
    Is a symbol and a token--
    How it hangs upon the trees,
    A mystery of mysteries!

In visions of the dark night
    I have dreamed of joy departed--
  But a waking dream of life and light
    Hath left me broken-hearted.

  Ah! what is not a dream by day
    To him whose eyes are cast
  On things around him with a ray
    Turned back upon the past?

  That holy dream--that holy dream,
    While all the world were chiding,
  Hath cheered me as a lovely beam,
    A lonely spirit guiding.

  What though that light, thro' storm and night,
    So trembled from afar--
  What could there be more purely bright
    In Truth's day star?

Romance, who loves to nod and sing,
  With drowsy head and folded wing,
  Among the green leaves as they shake
  Far down within some shadowy lake,
  To me a painted paroquet
  Hath been--a most familiar bird--
  Taught me my alphabet to say--
  To lisp my very earliest word
  While in the wild wood I did lie,
  A child--with a most knowing eye.

  Of late, eternal Condor years
  So shake the very Heaven on high
  With tumult as they thunder by,
  I have no time for idle cares
  Though gazing on the unquiet sky.
  And when an hour with calmer wings
  Its down upon my spirit flings--
  That little time with lyre and rhyme
  To while away--forbidden things!
  My heart would feel to be a crime
  Unless it trembled with the strings.

 Dim vales--and shadowy floods--
  And cloudy-looking woods,
  Whose forms we can't discover
  For the tears that drip all over
  Huge moons there wax and wane--
  Again--again--again--
  Every moment of the night--
  Forever changing places--
  And they put out the star-light
  With the breath from their pale faces.
  About twelve by the moon-dial
  One more filmy than the rest
  (A kind which, upon trial,
  They have found to be the best)
  Comes down--still down--and down
  With its centre on the crown
  Of a mountain's eminence,
  While its wide circumference
  In easy drapery falls
  Over hamlets, over halls,
  Wherever they may be--
  O'er the strange woods--o'er the sea--
  Over spirits on the wing--
  Over every drowsy thing--
  And buries them up quite
  In a labyrinth of light--
  And then, how deep!--O, deep!
  Is the passion of their sleep.
  In the morning they arise,
  And their moony covering
  Is soaring in the skies,
  With the tempests as they toss,
  Like--almost any thing--
  Or a yellow Albatross.
  They use that moon no more
  For the same end as before--
  Videlicet a tent--
  Which I think extravagant:
  Its atomies, however,
  Into a shower dissever,
  Of which those butterflies,
  Of Earth, who seek the skies,
  And so come down again
  (Never-contented thing!)
  Have brought a specimen
  Upon their quivering wings.

  In spring of youth it was my lot
  To haunt of the wide world a spot
  The which I could not love the less--
  So lovely was the loneliness
  Of a wild lake, with black rock bound,
  And the tall pines that towered around.

  But when the Night had thrown her pall
  Upon the spot, as upon all,
  And the mystic wind went by
  Murmuring in melody--
  Then--ah, then, I would awake
  To the terror of the lone lake.

  Yet that terror was not fright,
  But a tremulous delight--
  A feeling not the jewelled mine
  Could teach or bribe me to define--
  Nor Love--although the Love were thine.

  Death was in that poisonous wave,
  And in its gulf a fitting grave
  For him who thence could solace bring
  To his lone imagining--
  Whose solitary soul could make
  An Eden of that dim lake.


  'Twas noontide of summer,
    And midtime of night,
  And stars, in their orbits,
    Shone pale, through the light
  Of the brighter, cold moon.
    'Mid planets her slaves,
  Herself in the Heavens,
    Her beam on the waves.

    I gazed awhile
    On her cold smile;
  Too cold--too cold for me--
    There passed, as a shroud,
    A fleecy cloud,
  And I turned away to thee,
    Proud Evening Star,
    In thy glory afar
  And dearer thy beam shall be;
    For joy to my heart
    Is the proud part
  Thou bearest in Heaven at night,
    And more I admire
    Thy distant fire,
  Than that colder, lowly light.


  A dark unfathomed tide
  Of interminable pride--
  A mystery, and a dream,
  Should my early life seem;
  I say that dream was fraught
  With a wild and waking thought
  Of beings that have been,
  Which my spirit hath not seen,
  Had I let them pass me by,
  With a dreaming eye!
  Let none of earth inherit
  That vision on my spirit;
  Those thoughts I would control,
  As a spell upon his soul:
  For that bright hope at last
  And that light time have past,
  And my wordly rest hath gone
  With a sigh as it passed on:
  I care not though it perish
  With a thought I then did cherish.

 Oh! that my young life were a lasting dream!
  My spirit not awakening, till the beam
  Of an Eternity should bring the morrow.
  Yes! though that long dream were of hopeless sorrow,
  'Twere better than the cold reality
  Of waking life, to him whose heart must be,
  And hath been still, upon the lovely earth,
  A chaos of deep passion, from his birth.
  But should it be--that dream eternally
  Continuing--as dreams have been to me
  In my young boyhood--should it thus be given,
  'Twere folly still to hope for higher Heaven.
  For I have revelled when the sun was bright
  I' the summer sky, in dreams of living light
  And loveliness,--have left my very heart
  Inclines of my imaginary apart [1]
  From mine own home, with beings that have been
  Of mine own thought--what more could I have seen?
  'Twas once--and only once--and the wild hour
  From my remembrance shall not pass--some power
  Or spell had bound me--'twas the chilly wind
  Came o'er me in the night, and left behind
  Its image on my spirit--or the moon
  Shone on my slumbers in her lofty noon
  Too coldly--or the stars--howe'er it was
  That dream was that that night-wind--let it pass.
  _I have been_ happy, though in a dream.
  I have been happy--and I love the theme:
  Dreams! in their vivid coloring of life
  As in that fleeting, shadowy, misty strife
  Of semblance with reality which brings
  To the delirious eye, more lovely things
  Of Paradise and Love--and all my own!--
  Than young Hope in his sunniest hour hath known.

 Mysterious star!
  Thou wert my dream
  All a long summer night--
  Be now my theme!
  By this clear stream,
  Of thee will I write;
  Meantime from afar
  Bathe me in light!

  Thy world has not the dross of ours,
  Yet all the beauty--all the flowers
  That list our love or deck our bowers
  In dreamy gardens, where do lie
  Dreamy maidens all the day;
  While the silver winds of Circassy
  On violet couches faint away.
  Little--oh! little dwells in thee
  Like unto what on earth we see:
  Beauty's eye is here the bluest
  In the falsest and untruest--
  On the sweetest air doth float
  The most sad and solemn note--
  If with thee be broken hearts,
  Joy so peacefully departs,
  That its echo still doth dwell,
  Like the murmur in the shell.
  Thou! thy truest type of grief
  Is the gently falling leaf--
  Thou! thy framing is so holy
  Sorrow is not melancholy.


 Succeeding years, too wild for song,
  Then rolled like tropic storms along,
  Where, though the garish lights that fly
  Dying along the troubled sky,
  Lay bare, through vistas thunder-riven,
  The blackness of the general Heaven,
  That very blackness yet doth fling
  Light on the lightning's silver wing.

  For being an idle boy lang syne,
  Who read Anacreon and drank wine,
  I early found Anacreon rhymes
  Were almost passionate sometimes--
  And by strange alchemy of brain
  His pleasures always turned to pain--
  His naïveté to wild desire--
  His wit to love--his wine to fire--
  And so, being young and dipt in folly,
  I fell in love with melancholy.

  And used to throw my earthly rest
  And quiet all away in jest--
  I could not love except where Death
  Was mingling his with Beauty's breath--
  Or Hymen, Time, and Destiny,
  Were stalking between her and me.


But _now_ my soul hath too much room--
  Gone are the glory and the gloom--
  The black hath mellow'd into gray,
  And all the fires are fading away.

  My draught of passion hath been deep--
  I revell'd, and I now would sleep--
  And after drunkenness of soul
  Succeeds the glories of the bowl--
  An idle longing night and day
  To dream my very life away.

  But dreams--of those who dream as I,
  Aspiringly, are damned, and die:
  Yet should I swear I mean alone,
  By notes so very shrilly blown,
  To break upon Time's monotone,
  While yet my vapid joy and grief
  Are tintless of the yellow leaf--
  Why not an imp the greybeard hath,
  Will shake his shadow in my path--
  And e'en the greybeard will o'erlook
  Connivingly my dreaming-book.



 From childhood's hour I have not been
  As others were--I have not seen
  As others saw--I could not bring
  My passions from a common spring--
  From the same source I have not taken
  My sorrow--I could not awaken
  My heart to joy at the same tone--
  And all I loved--_I_ loved alone--
  _Thou_--in my childhood--in the dawn
  Of a most stormy life--was drawn
  From every depth of good and ill
  The mystery which binds me still--
  From the torrent, or the fountain--
  From the red cliff of the mountain--
  From the sun that round me roll'd
  In its autumn tint of gold--
  From the lightning in the sky
  As it passed me flying by--
  From the thunder and the storm--
  And the cloud that took the form
  (When the rest of Heaven was blue)
  Of a demon in my view.


  In these rapid, restless shadows,
    Once I walked at eventide,
  When a gentle, silent maiden,
    Walked in beauty at my side.
  She alone there walked beside me
  All in beauty, like a bride.

  Pallidly the moon was shining
    On the dewy meadows nigh;
  On the silvery, silent rivers,
    On the mountains far and high,--
  On the ocean's star-lit waters,
    Where the winds a-weary die.

  Slowly, silently we wandered
    From the open cottage door,
  Underneath the elm's long branches
    To the pavement bending o'er;
  Underneath the mossy willow
    And the dying sycamore.

  With the myriad stars in beauty
    All bedight, the heavens were seen,
  Radiant hopes were bright around me,
    Like the light of stars serene;
  Like the mellow midnight splendor
    Of the Night's irradiate queen.

  Audibly the elm-leaves whispered
    Peaceful, pleasant melodies,
  Like the distant murmured music
    Of unquiet, lovely seas;
  While the winds were hushed in slumber
    In the fragrant flowers and trees.

  Wondrous and unwonted beauty
    Still adorning all did seem,
  While I told my love in fables
    'Neath the willows by the stream;
  Would the heart have kept unspoken
    Love that was its rarest dream!

  Instantly away we wandered
    In the shadowy twilight tide,
  She, the silent, scornful maiden,
    Walking calmly at my side,
  With a step serene and stately,
    All in beauty, all in pride.

  Vacantly I walked beside her.
    On the earth mine eyes were cast;
  Swift and keen there came unto me
    Bitter memories of the past--
  On me, like the rain in Autumn
    On the dead leaves, cold and fast.

  Underneath the elms we parted,
    By the lowly cottage door;
  One brief word alone was uttered--
    Never on our lips before;
  And away I walked forlornly,
  Broken-hearted evermore.

  Slowly, silently I loitered,
    Homeward, in the night, alone;
  Sudden anguish bound my spirit,
    That my youth had never known;
  Wild unrest, like that which cometh
    When the Night's first dream hath flown.

  Now, to me the elm-leaves whisper
    Mad, discordant melodies,
  And keen melodies like shadows
    Haunt the moaning willow trees,
  And the sycamores with laughter
    Mock me in the nightly breeze.

  Sad and pale the Autumn moonlight
    Through the sighing foliage streams;
  And each morning, midnight shadow,
    Shadow of my sorrow seems;
  Strive, O heart, forget thine idol!
    And, O soul, forget thy dreams!


      'Tis said that when
      The hands of men
    Tamed this primeval wood,
  And hoary trees with groans of wo,
  Like warriors by an unknown foe,
    Were in their strength subdued,
      The virgin Earth
      Gave instant birth
    To springs that ne'er did flow--
      That in the sun
      Did rivulets run,
  And all around rare flowers did blow--
      The wild rose pale
      Perfumed the gale,
  And the queenly lily adown the dale
      (Whom the sun and the dew
      And the winds did woo),
  With the gourd and the grape luxuriant grew.

      So when in tears
      The love of years
    Is wasted like the snow,
  And the fine fibrils of its life
  By the rude wrong of instant strife
    Are broken at a blow--
      Within the heart
      Do springs upstart
    Of which it doth now know,
      And strange, sweet dreams,
      Like silent streams
  That from new fountains overflow,
      With the earlier tide
      Of rivers glide
  Deep in the heart whose hope has died--
  Quenching the fires its ashes hide,--
    Its ashes, whence will spring and grow
      Sweet flowers, ere long,--
    The rare and radiant flowers of song!

Piping down the valleys wild,
   Piping songs of pleasant glee,
On a cloud I saw a child,
   And he laughing said to me:

‘Pipe a song about a Lamb!’
   So I piped with merry cheer.
‘Piper, pipe that song again.’
   So I piped: he wept to hear.

‘Drop thy pipe, thy happy pipe;
   Sing thy songs of happy cheer!’
So I sung the same again,
   While he wept with joy to hear.

‘Piper, sit thee down and write
   In a book, that all may read.’
So he vanished from my sight;
   And I plucked a hollow reed,

And I made a rural pen,
   And I stained the water clear,
And I wrote my happy songs
   Every child may joy to hear.




How sweet is the shepherd’s sweet lot!
From the morn to the evening he strays;
He shall follow his sheep all the day,
And his tongue shall be fillèd with praise.

For he hears the lambs’ innocent call,
And he hears the ewes’ tender reply;
He is watchful while they are in peace,
For they know when their shepherd is nigh.




The sun does arise,
And make happy the skies;
The merry bells ring
To welcome the Spring;
The skylark and thrush,
The birds of the bush,
Sing louder around
To the bells’ cheerful sound;
While our sports shall be seen
On the echoing green.

Old John, with white hair,
Does laugh away care,
Sitting under the oak,
Among the old folk.
They laugh at our play,
And soon they all say,
‘Such, such were the joys
When we all—girls and boys—
In our youth-time were seen
On the echoing green.’

Till the little ones, weary,
No more can be merry:
The sun does descend,
And our sports have an end.
Round the laps of their mothers
Many sisters and brothers,
Like birds in their nest,
Are ready for rest,
And sport no more seen
On the darkening green.




   Little lamb, who made thee?
   Does thou know who made thee,
Gave thee life, and bid thee feed
By the stream and o’er the mead;
Gave thee clothing of delight,
Softest clothing, woolly, bright;
Gave thee such a tender voice,
Making all the vales rejoice?
   Little lamb, who made thee?
   Does thou know who made thee?

   Little lamb, I’ll tell thee;
   Little lamb, I’ll tell thee:
He is callèd by thy name,
For He calls Himself a Lamb.
He is meek, and He is mild,
He became a little child.
I a child, and thou a lamb,
We are callèd by His name.
   Little lamb, God bless thee!
   Little lamb, God bless thee!




My mother bore me in the southern wild,
   And I am black, but O my soul is white!
White as an angel is the English child,
   But I am black, as if bereaved of light.

My mother taught me underneath a tree,
   And, sitting down before the heat of day,
She took me on her lap and kissèd me,
   And, pointing to the East, began to say:

‘Look on the rising sun: there God does live,
   And gives His light, and gives His heat away,
And flowers and trees and beasts and men receive
   Comfort in morning, joy in the noonday.

‘And we are put on earth a little space,
   That we may learn to bear the beams of love;
And these black bodies and this sunburnt face
   Are but a cloud, and like a shady grove.

‘For, when our souls have learned the heat to bear,
   The cloud will vanish, we shall hear His voice,
Saying, “Come out from the grove, my love and care,
   And round my golden tent like lambs rejoice.”’

Thus did my mother say, and kissed me,
   And thus I say to little English boy.
When I from black, and he from white cloud free,
   And round the tent of God like lambs we joy,

I’ll shade him from the heat till he can bear
   To lean in joy upon our Father’s knee;
And then I’ll stand and stroke his silver hair,
   And be like him, and he will then love me.




Merry, merry sparrow!
Under leaves so green
A happy blossom
Sees you, swift as arrow,
Seek your cradle narrow,
Near my bosom.
Pretty, pretty robin!
Under leaves so green
A happy blossom
Hears you sobbing, sobbing,
Pretty, pretty robin,
Near my bosom.




When my mother died I was very young,
And my father sold me while yet my tongue
Could scarcely cry ‘Weep! weep! weep! weep!’
So your chimneys I sweep, and in soot I sleep.

There’s little Tom Dacre, who cried when his head,
That curled like a lamb’s back, was shaved; so I said,
‘Hush, Tom! never mind it, for, when your head’s bare,
You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair.’

And so he was quiet, and that very night,
As Tom was a-sleeping, he had such a sight!—
That thousands of sweepers, Dick, Joe, Ned, and Jack,
Were all of them locked up in coffins of black.

And by came an angel, who had a bright key,
And he opened the coffins, and set them all free;
Then down a green plain, leaping, laughing, they run
And wash in a river, and shine in the sun.

Then naked and white, all their bags left behind,
They rise upon clouds, and sport in the wind:
And the angel told Tom, if he’d be a good boy,
He’d have God for his father, and never want joy.

And so Tom awoke, and we rose in the dark,
And got with our bags and our brushes to work.
Though the morning was cold, Tom was happy and warm:
So, if all do their duty, they need not fear harm.




‘Father, father, where are you going?
   O do not walk so fast!
   Speak, father, speak to your little boy,
Or else I shall be lost.’

The night was dark, no father was there,
   The child was wet with dew;
The mire was deep, and the child did weep,
   And away the vapour flew.




The little boy lost in the lonely fen,
   Led by the wandering light,
   Began to cry, but God, ever nigh,
Appeared like his father, in white.

He kissed the child, and by the hand led,
   And to his mother brought,
Who in sorrow pale, through the lonely dale,
   Her little boy weeping sought.




When the green woods laugh with the voice of joy,
And the dimpling stream runs laughing by;
When the air does laugh with our merry wit,
And the green hill laughs with the noise of it;

When the meadows laugh with lively green,
And the grasshopper laughs in the merry scene;
When Mary and Susan and Emily
With their sweet round mouths sing ‘Ha ha he!’

When the painted birds laugh in the shade,
Where our table with cherries and nuts is spread:
Come live, and be merry, and join with me,
To sing the sweet chorus of ‘Ha ha he!’




Sweet dreams, form a shade
O’er my lovely infant’s head!
Sweet dreams of pleasant streams
By happy, silent, moony beams!

Sweet Sleep, with soft down
Weave thy brows an infant crown!
Sweet Sleep, angel mild,
Hover o’er my happy child!

Sweet smiles, in the night
Hover over my delight!
Sweet smiles, mother’s smiles,
All the livelong night beguiles.

Sweet moans, dovelike sighs,
Chase not slumber from thy eyes!
Sweet moans, sweeter smiles,
All the dovelike moans beguiles.

Sleep, sleep, happy child!
All creation slept and smiled.
Sleep, sleep, happy sleep,
While o’er thee thy mother weep.

Sweet babe, in thy face
Holy image I can trace;
Sweet babe, once like thee
Thy Maker lay, and wept for me:

Wept for me, for thee, for all,
When He was an infant small.
Thou His image ever see,
Heavenly face that smiles on thee!

Smiles on thee, on me, on all,
Who became an infant small;
Infant smiles are His own smiles;
Heaven and earth to peace beguiles.




To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
   All pray in their distress,
   And to these virtues of delight
Return their thankfulness.

For Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
   Is God our Father dear;
And Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
   Is man, His child and care.

For Mercy has a human heart;
   Pity, a human face;
And Love, the human form divine:
   And Peace the human dress.

Then every man, of every clime,
   That prays in his distress,
Prays to the human form divine:
   Love, Mercy, Pity, Peace.

And all must love the human form,
   In heathen, Turk, or Jew.
Where Mercy, Love, and Pity dwell,
   There God is dwelling too.




’Twas on a holy Thursday, their innocent faces clean,
The children walking two and two, in red, and blue, and green:
Grey-headed beadles walked before, with wands as white as snow,
Till into the high dome of Paul’s they like Thames waters flow.

O what a multitude they seemed, these flowers of London town!
Seated in companies they sit, with radiance all their own.
The hum of multitudes was there, but multitudes of lambs,
Thousands of little boys and girls raising their innocent hands.

Now like a mighty wind they raise to heaven the voice of song,
Or like harmonious thunderings the seats of heaven among:
Beneath them sit the aged men, wise guardians of the poor.
Then cherish pity, lest you drive an angel from your door.




The sun descending in the West,
The evening star does shine;
The birds are silent in their nest,
And I must seek for mine.
   The moon, like a flower
   In heaven’s high bower,
   With silent delight,
   Sits and smiles on the night.

Farewell, green fields and happy groves,
Where flocks have took delight,
Where lambs have nibbled, silent moves
The feet of angels bright;
   Unseen, they pour blessing,
   And joy without ceasing,
   On each bud and blossom,
   And each sleeping bosom.

They look in every thoughtless nest
Where birds are covered warm;
They visit caves of every beast,
To keep them all from harm:
   If they see any weeping
   That should have been sleeping,
   They pour sleep on their head,
   And sit down by their bed.

When wolves and tigers howl for prey,
They pitying stand and weep;
Seeking to drive their thirst away,
And keep them from the sheep.
   But, if they rush dreadful,
   The angels, most heedful,
   Receive each mild spirit,
   New worlds to inherit.

And there the lion’s ruddy eyes
Shall flow with tears of gold:
And pitying the tender cries,
And walking round the fold:
   Saying: ‘Wrath by His meekness,
   And, by His health, sickness,
   Is driven away
   From our immortal day.

‘And now beside thee, bleating lamb,
I can lie down and sleep,
Or think on Him who bore thy name,
Graze after thee, and weep.
   For, washed in life’s river,
   My bright mane for ever
   Shall shine like the gold,
   As I guard o’er the fold.’




      Sound the flute!
      Now it’s mute!
      Birds delight,
      Day and night,
      Nightingale,
      In the dale,
      Lark in sky,—
      Merrily,
Merrily, merrily to welcome in the year.

      Little boy,
      Full of joy;
      Little girl,
      Sweet and small;
      Cock does crow,
      So do you;
      Merry voice,
      Infant noise;
Merrily, merrily to welcome in the year.

      Little lamb,
      Here I am;
      Come and lick
      My white neck;
      Let me pull
      Your soft wool;
      Let me kiss
      Your soft face;
Merrily, merrily we welcome in the year.




When voices of children are heard on the green,
   And laughing is heard on the hill,
My heart is at rest within my breast,
   And everything else is still.
‘Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down,
   And the dews of night arise;
Come, come, leave off play, and let us away,
   Till the morning appears in the skies.’

‘No, no, let us play, for it is yet day,
   And we cannot go to sleep;
Besides, in the sky the little birds fly,
   And the hills are all covered with sheep.’
‘Well, well, go and play till the light fades away,
   And then go home to bed.’
The little ones leaped, and shouted, and laughed,
   And all the hills echoèd.




‘I have no name;
I am but two days old.’
What shall I call thee?
‘I happy am,
Joy is my name.’
Sweet joy befall thee!

Pretty joy!
Sweet joy, but two days old.
Sweet joy I call thee:
Thou dost smile,
I sing the while;
Sweet joy befall thee!




Once a dream did weave a shade
O’er my angel-guarded bed,
That an emmet lost its way
Where on grass methought I lay.

Troubled, wildered, and forlorn,
Dark, benighted, travel-worn,
Over many a tangled spray,
All heart-broke, I heard her say:

‘O my children! do they cry,
Do they hear their father sigh?
Now they look abroad to see,
Now return and weep for me.’

Pitying, I dropped a tear:
But I saw a glow-worm near,
Who replied, ‘What wailing wight
Calls the watchman of the night?’

‘I am set to light the ground,
While the beetle goes his round:
Follow now the beetle’s hum;
Little wanderer, hie thee home!’




Can I see another’s woe,
And not be in sorrow too?
Can I see another’s grief,
And not seek for kind relief?

Can I see a falling tear,
And not feel my sorrow’s share?
Can a father see his child
Weep, nor be with sorrow filled?

Can a mother sit and hear
An infant groan, an infant fear?
No, no! never can it be!
Never, never can it be!

And can He who smiles on all
Hear the wren with sorrows small,
Hear the small bird’s grief and care,
Hear the woes that infants bear—

And not sit beside the nest,
Pouring pity in their breast,
And not sit the cradle near,
Weeping tear on infant’s tear?

And not sit both night and day,
Wiping all our tears away?
O no! never can it be!
Never, never can it be!

He doth give His joy to all:
He becomes an infant small,
He becomes a man of woe,
He doth feel the sorrow too.

Think not thou canst sigh a sigh,
And thy Maker is not by:
Think not thou canst weep a tear,
And thy Maker is not near.

O He gives to us His joy,
That our grief He may destroy:
Till our grief is fled and gone
He doth sit by us and moan.





Hear the voice of the Bard,
Who present, past, and future, sees;
Whose ears have heard
The Holy Word
That walked among the ancient trees;

Calling the lapséd soul,
And weeping in the evening dew;
That might control
The starry pole,
And fallen, fallen light renew!

‘O Earth, O Earth, return!
Arise from out the dewy grass!
Night is worn,
And the morn
Rises from the slumbrous mass.

‘Turn away no more;
Why wilt thou turn away?
The starry floor,
The watery shore,
Is given thee till the break of day.’




Earth raised up her head
From the darkness dread and drear,
Her light fled,
Stony, dread,
And her locks covered with grey despair.

‘Prisoned on watery shore,
Starry jealousy does keep my den
Cold and hoar;
Weeping o’er,
I hear the father of the ancient men.

‘Selfish father of men!
Cruel, jealous, selfish fear!
Can delight,
Chained in night,
The virgins of youth and morning bear.

‘Does spring hide its joy,
When buds and blossoms grow?
Does the sower
Sow by night,
Or the ploughman in darkness plough?

‘Break this heavy chain,
That does freeze my bones around!
Selfish, vain,
Eternal bane,
That free love with bondage bound.’




‘Love seeketh not itself to please,
   Nor for itself hath any care,
But for another gives its ease,
   And builds a heaven in hell’s despair.’

So sung a little clod of clay,
   Trodden with the cattle’s feet,
But a pebble of the brook
   Warbled out these metres meet:

‘Love seeketh only Self to please,
   To bind another to its delight,
Joys in another’s loss of ease,
   And builds a hell in heaven’s despite.’




Is this a holy thing to see
   In a rich and fruitful land,—
Babes reduced to misery,
   Fed with cold and usurous hand?

Is that trembling cry a song?
   Can it be a song of joy?
And so many children poor?
   It is a land of poverty!

And their sun does never shine,
   And their fields are bleak and bare,
And their ways are filled with thorns,
   It is eternal winter there.

For where’er the sun does shine,
   And where’er the rain does fall,
Babe can never hunger there,
   Nor poverty the mind appal.




In futurity
I prophesy
That the earth from sleep
(Grave the sentence deep)

Shall arise, and seek
For her Maker meek;
And the desert wild
Become a garden mild.

In the southern clime,
Where the summer’s prime
Never fades away,
Lovely Lyca lay.

Seven summers old
Lovely Lyca told.
She had wandered long,
Hearing wild birds’ song.

‘Sweet sleep, come to me,
Underneath this tree;
Do father, mother, weep?
Where can Lyca sleep?

‘Lost in desert wild
Is your little child.
How can Lyca sleep
If her mother weep?

‘If her heart does ache,
Then let Lyca wake;
If my mother sleep,
Lyca shall not weep.

‘Frowning, frowning night,
O’er this desert bright
Let thy moon arise,
While I close my eyes.’

Sleeping Lyca lay,
While the beasts of prey,
Come from caverns deep,
Viewed the maid asleep.

The kingly lion stood,
And the virgin viewed:
Then he gambolled round
O’er the hallowed ground.

Leopards, tigers, play
Round her as she lay;
While the lion old
Bowed his mane of gold,

And her bosom lick,
And upon her neck,
From his eyes of flame,
Ruby tears there came;

While the lioness
Loosed her slender dress,
And naked they conveyed
To caves the sleeping maid.




All the night in woe
Lyca’s parents go
Over valleys deep,
While the deserts weep.

Tired and woe-begone,
Hoarse with making moan,
Arm in arm, seven days
They traced the desert ways.

Seven nights they sleep
Among shadows deep,
And dream they see their child
Starved in desert wild.

Pale through pathless ways
The fancied image strays,
Famished, weeping, weak,
With hollow piteous shriek.

Rising from unrest,
The trembling woman pressed
With feet of weary woe;
She could no further go.

In his arms he bore
Her, armed with sorrow sore;
Till before their way
A couching lion lay.

Turning back was vain:
Soon his heavy mane
Bore them to the ground,
Then he stalked around,

Smelling to his prey;
But their fears allay
When he licks their hands,
And silent by them stands.

They look upon his eyes,
Filled with deep surprise;
And wondering behold
A spirit armed in gold.

On his head a crown,
On his shoulders down
Flowed his golden hair.
Gone was all their care.

‘Follow me,’ he said;
‘Weep not for the maid;
In my palace deep,
Lyca lies asleep.’

Then they followèd
Where the vision led,
And saw their sleeping child
Among tigers wild.

To this day they dwell
In a lonely dell,
Nor fear the wolvish howl
Nor the lion’s growl.




A little black thing among the snow,
Crying! ‘weep! weep!’ in notes of woe!
‘Where are thy father and mother?  Say!’—
‘They are both gone up to the church to pray.

‘Because I was happy upon the heath,
And smiled among the winter’s snow,
They clothed me in the clothes of death,
And taught me to sing the notes of woe.

‘And because I am happy and dance and sing,
They think they have done me no injury,
And are gone to praise God and His priest and king,
Who made up a heaven of our misery.’




When the voices of children are heard on the green,
   And whisperings are in the dale,
The days of my youth rise fresh in my mind,
   My face turns green and pale.

Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down,
   And the dews of night arise;
Your spring and your day are wasted in play,
   And your winter and night in disguise.




O rose, thou art sick!
   The invisible worm,
That flies in the night,
   In the howling storm,

Has found out thy bed
   Of crimson joy,
And his dark secret love
   Does thy life destroy.




Little Fly,
Thy summer’s play
My thoughtless hand
Has brushed away.

Am not I
A fly like thee?
Or art not thou
A man like me?

For I dance,
And drink, and sing,
Till some blind hand
Shall brush my wing.

If thought is life
And strength and breath,
And the want
Of thought is death;

Then am I
A happy fly.
If I live,
Or if I die.




I dreamt a dream!  What can it mean?
And that I was a maiden Queen
Guarded by an Angel mild:
Witless woe was ne’er beguiled!

And I wept both night and day,
And he wiped my tears away;
And I wept both day and night,
And hid from him my heart’s delight.

So he took his wings, and fled;
Then the morn blushed rosy red.
I dried my tears, and armed my fears
With ten thousand shields and spears.

Soon my Angel came again;
I was armed, he came in vain;
For the time of youth was fled,
And grey hairs were on my head.




Tiger, tiger, burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Could frame thy fearful symmetry?

In what distant deeps or skies
Burnt the fire of thine eyes?
On what wings dare he aspire?
What the hand dare seize the fire?

And what shoulder and what art
Could twist the sinews of thy heart?
And, when thy heart began to beat,
What dread hand and what dread feet?

What the hammer? what the chain?
In what furnace was thy brain?
What the anvil? what dread grasp
Dare its deadly terrors clasp?

When the stars threw down their spears,
And watered heaven with their tears,
Did He smile His work to see?
Did He who made the lamb make thee?

Tiger, tiger, burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Dare frame thy fearful symmetry?




A flower was offered to me,
   Such a flower as May never bore;
But I said, ‘I’ve a pretty rose tree,’
   And I passed the sweet flower o’er.

Then I went to my pretty rose tree,
   To tend her by day and by night;
But my rose turned away with jealousy,
   And her thorns were my only delight.




Ah, sunflower, weary of time,
   Who countest the steps of the sun;
Seeking after that sweet golden clime
   Where the traveller’s journey is done;

Where the Youth pined away with desire,
   And the pale virgin shrouded in snow,
Arise from their graves, and aspire
   Where my Sunflower wishes to go!




The modest Rose puts forth a thorn,
The humble sheep a threat’ning horn:
While the Lily white shall in love delight,
Nor a thorn nor a threat stain her beauty bright.




I went to the Garden of Love,
   And saw what I never had seen;
A Chapel was built in the midst,
   Where I used to play on the green.

And the gates of this Chapel were shut,
   And ‘Thou shalt not’ writ over the door;
So I turned to the Garden of Love
   That so many sweet flowers bore.

And I saw it was filled with graves,
   And tombstones where flowers should be;
And priests in black gowns were walking their rounds,
   And binding with briars my joys and desires.




Dear mother, dear mother, the Church is cold;
But the Alehouse is healthy, and pleasant, and warm.
Besides, I can tell where I am used well;
Such usage in heaven will never do well.

But, if at the Church they would give us some ale,
And a pleasant fire our souls to regale,
We’d sing and we’d pray all the livelong day,
Nor ever once wish from the Church to stray.

Then the Parson might preach, and drink, and sing,
And we’d be as happy as birds in the spring;
And modest Dame Lurch, who is always at church,
Would not have bandy children, nor fasting, nor birch.

And God, like a father, rejoicing to see
His children as pleasant and happy as He,
Would have no more quarrel with the Devil or the barrel,
But kiss him, and give him both drink and apparel.




I wander through each chartered street,
   Near where the chartered Thames does flow,
A mark in every face I meet,
   Marks of weakness, marks of woe.

In every cry of every man,
   In every infant’s cry of fear,
In every voice, in every ban,
   The mind-forged manacles I hear:

How the chimney-sweeper’s cry
   Every blackening church appals,
And the hapless soldier’s sigh
   Runs in blood down palace-walls.

But most, through midnight streets I hear
   How the youthful harlot’s curse
Blasts the new-born infant’s tear,
   And blights with plagues the marriage hearse.




Pity would be no more
If we did not make somebody poor,
And Mercy no more could be
If all were as happy as we.

And mutual fear brings Peace,
Till the selfish loves increase;
Then Cruelty knits a snare,
And spreads his baits with care.

He sits down with holy fears,
And waters the ground with tears;
Then Humility takes its root
Underneath his foot.

Soon spreads the dismal shade
Of Mystery over his head,
And the caterpillar and fly
Feed on the Mystery.

And it bears the fruit of Deceit,
Ruddy and sweet to eat,
And the raven his nest has made
In its thickest shade.

The gods of the earth and sea
Sought through nature to find this tree,
But their search was all in vain:
There grows one in the human Brain.




My mother groaned, my father wept:
Into the dangerous world I leapt,
Helpless, naked, piping loud,
Like a fiend hid in a cloud.

Struggling in my father’s hands,
Striving against my swaddling bands,
Bound and weary, I thought best
To sulk upon my mother’s breast.




I was angry with my friend:
I told my wrath, my wrath did end.
I was angry with my foe:
I told it not, my wrath did grow.

And I watered it in fears
Night and morning with my tears,
And I sunnèd it with smiles
And with soft deceitful wiles.

And it grew both day and night,
Till it bore an apple bright,
And my foe beheld it shine,
And he knew that it was mine,—

And into my garden stole
When the night had veiled the pole;
In the morning, glad, I see
My foe outstretched beneath the tree.




‘Nought loves another as itself,
   Nor venerates another so,
Nor is it possible to thought
   A greater than itself to know.

‘And, father, how can I love you
   Or any of my brothers more?
I love you like the little bird
   That picks up crumbs around the door.’

The Priest sat by and heard the child;
   In trembling zeal he seized his hair,
He led him by his little coat,
   And all admired his priestly care.

And standing on the altar high,
   ‘Lo, what a fiend is here!’ said he:
‘One who sets reason up for judge
   Of our most holy mystery.’

The weeping child could not be heard,
   The weeping parents wept in vain:
They stripped him to his little shirt,
   And bound him in an iron chain,

And burned him in a holy place
   Where many had been burned before;
The weeping parents wept in vain.
   Are such things done on Albion’s shore?




Children of the future age,
Reading this indignant page,
Know that in a former time
Love, sweet love, was thought a crime.

In the age of gold,
Free from winter’s cold,
Youth and maiden bright,
To the holy light,
Naked in the sunny beams delight.

Once a youthful pair,
Filled with softest care,
Met in garden bright
Where the holy light
Had just removed the curtains of the night.

There, in rising day,
On the grass they play;
Parents were afar,
Strangers came not near,
And the maiden soon forgot her fear.

Tired with kisses sweet,
They agree to meet
When the silent sleep
Waves o’er heaven’s deep,
And the weary tired wanderers weep.

To her father white
Came the maiden bright;
But his loving look,
Like the holy book,
All her tender limbs with terror shook.

Ona, pale and weak,
To thy father speak!
O the trembling fear!
O the dismal care
That shakes the blossoms of my hoary hair!’




Cruelty has a human heart,
   And Jealousy a human face;
Terror the human form divine,
   And Secrecy the human dress.

The human dress is forgèd iron,
   The human form a fiery forge,
The human face a furnace sealed,
   The human heart its hungry gorge.




Sleep, sleep, beauty bright,
Dreaming in the joys of night;
Sleep, sleep; in thy sleep
Little sorrows sit and weep.

Sweet babe, in thy face
Soft desires I can trace,
Secret joys and secret smiles,
Little pretty infant wiles.

As thy softest limbs I feel,
Smiles as of the morning steal
O’er thy cheek, and o’er thy breast
Where thy little heart doth rest.

O the cunning wiles that creep
In thy little heart asleep!
When thy little heart doth wake,
Then the dreadful light shall break.




I love to rise in a summer morn,
   When the birds sing on every tree;
The distant huntsman winds his horn,
   And the skylark sings with me:
   O what sweet company!

But to go to school in a summer morn,—
   O it drives all joy away!
Under a cruel eye outworn,
   The little ones spend the day
   In sighing and dismay.

Ah then at times I drooping sit,
   And spend many an anxious hour;
Nor in my book can I take delight,
   Nor sit in learning’s bower,
   Worn through with the dreary shower.

How can the bird that is born for joy
   Sit in a cage and sing?
How can a child, when fears annoy,
   But droop his tender wing,
   And forget his youthful spring!

O father and mother if buds are nipped,
   And blossoms blown away;
And if the tender plants are stripped
   Of their joy in the springing day,
   By sorrow and care’s dismay,—

How shall the summer arise in joy,
   Or the summer fruits appear?
Or how shall we gather what griefs destroy,
   Or bless the mellowing year,
   When the blasts of winter appear?




Whate’er is born of mortal birth
Must be consumèd with the earth,
To rise from generation free:
Then what have I to do with thee?

The sexes sprung from shame and pride,
Blowed in the morn, in evening died;
But mercy changed death into sleep;
The sexes rose to work and weep.

Thou, mother of my mortal part,
With cruelty didst mould my heart,
And with false self-deceiving tears
Didst blind my nostrils, eyes, and ears,

Didst close my tongue in senseless clay,
And me to mortal life betray.
The death of Jesus set me free:
Then what have I to do with thee?




Youth of delight! come hither
And see the opening morn,
Image of Truth new-born.
Doubt is fled, and clouds of reason,
Dark disputes and artful teazing.
Folly is an endless maze;
Tangled roots perplex her ways;
How many have fallen there!
They stumble all night over bones of the dead;
And feel—they know not what but care;
And wish to lead others, when they should be led.
